C H A P T E R7
PROJECT COST 
MANAGEMENT
L E A R N I N G  O B J E C T I V E S
After reading this chapter, you will be able to:
r
6OEFSTUBOEUIFJNQPSUBODFPGQSPKFDUDPTUNBOBHFNFOU
r
&YQMBJOCBTJDQSPKFDUDPTUNBOBHFNFOUQSJODJQMFTDPODFQUTBOEUFSNT
r
%FTDSJCFUIFQSPDFTTPGQMBOOJOHDPTUNBOBHFNFOU
r
%JTDVTTEJGGFSFOUUZQFTPGDPTUFTUJNBUFTBOENFUIPETGPSQSFQBSJOHUIFN
r
6OEFSTUBOEUIFQSPDFTTFTPGEFUFSNJOJOHBCVEHFUBOEQSFQBSJOHBDPTU
FTUJNBUFGPSBOJOGPSNBUJPOUFDIOPMPHZ	*5
QSPKFDU
r
6OEFSTUBOEUIFCFOFGJUTPGVTJOHFBSOFEWBMVFNBOBHFNFOUBOE
QSPKFDUQPSUGPMJPNBOBHFNFOUUPBTTJTUJODPTUDPOUSPM
r
%FTDSJCFIPXQSPKFDUNBOBHFNFOUTPGUXBSFDBOBTTJTUJOQSPKFDUDPTU
NBOBHFNFOU
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS
264
O P E N I N G  C A S E
Juan Gonzales was a systems analyst and network specialist for the waterworks depart-
ment of a major Mexican city. He enjoyed helping the city develop its infrastructure. 
His next career objective was to become a project manager so he could have even more 
influence. One of his colleagues invited him to attend an important project review meet-
ing for large government projects, including the Surveyor Pro project, in which Juan was 
most interested. The Surveyor Pro project was a concept for developing a sophisticated 
information system that included expert systems, object-oriented databases, and wire-
less communications. The system would provide instant, graphical information to help 
government surveyors do their jobs. For example, after a surveyor touched a map on the 
screen of a handheld device, the system would prompt the surveyor to enter the type of 
information needed for that area. This system would help in planning and implementing 
many projects, from laying fiber-optic cable to installing water lines.
Juan was very surprised, however, that the majority of the meeting was spent dis-
cussing cost-related issues. The government officials were reviewing many existing pro-
jects to evaluate their performance and the potential impact on the government’s budget 
before discussing funding for any new projects. Juan did not understand many of the 
terms and charts being presented. What was this “earned value” they kept referring to? 
How were they estimating what it would cost to complete projects or how long it would 
take? Juan thought he would learn more about the new technologies the Surveyor Pro 
project would use, but he discovered that the cost estimates and projected benefits were 
of most interest to the government officials at the meeting. It also seemed that consider-
able effort would go toward detailed financial studies before any technical work could 
even start. Juan wished he had taken some accounting and finance courses so he could 
understand the acronyms and concepts people were discussing. Although Juan had a 
degree in electrical engineering, he had no formal education in finance and little experi-
ence with it. However, if Juan could understand information systems and networks, he 
was confident that he could understand financial issues on projects as well. He jotted 
down questions to discuss with his colleagues after the meeting.
7.1 THE IMPORTANCE OF PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT
IT projects have a poor track record in meeting budget goals. A 2011 study published in the 
Harvard Business Review examined IT change initiatives in almost 1,500 projects and re-
ported an average cost overrun of 27 percent. Cost overrun is the additional percentage or 
dollar amount by which actual costs exceed estimates. The study was considered the largest 
ever to analyze IT projects. The projects ranged from enterprise resource planning to man-
agement information and customer relationship management systems. Most projects incurred 
high expenses, with an average cost of $167 million; the largest project cost $33 billion.1
The most important finding in the study, however, was the discovery of a large num-
ber of gigantic overages when analyzing the project overrun data. One in six of all projects 
studied contained a “black swan”: a high-impact event that is rare and unpredictable, but 
not improbable in retrospect. These IT black swan projects had an average cost overrun 
of 200 percent and a schedule overrun of almost 70 percent. “This highlights the true pit-
fall of IT change initiatives: It’s not that they’re particularly prone to high cost overruns 
on average, as management consultants and academic studies have previously suggested. 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
1SPKFDU$PTU.BOBHFNFOU
265
It’s that an unusually large proportion of them incur massive overages—that is, there are 
a disproportionate number of black swans. By focusing on averages instead of the more 
damaging outliers, most managers and consultants have been missing the real problem.”2
Obviously, IT projects have room for improvement in meeting cost goals. This chapter de-
scribes important concepts in project cost management, particularly planning cost management, 
creating good estimates, and using earned value management (EVM) to assist in cost control.
W H A T  W E N T  W R O N G ?
The United Kingdom’s National Health Service (NHS) IT modernization program was 
called “the greatest IT disaster in history” by one London columnist. This 10-year pro-
gram, which started in 2002, was created to provide an electronic patient records system, 
appointment booking, and a prescription drug system in England and Wales. Britain’s 
Labor government estimates that the program will eventually cost more than $55 bil-
lion, a $26 billion overrun. The program has been plagued by technical problems due to 
incompatible systems, resistance from physicians who say they were not adequately con-
sulted about system features, and arguments among contractors about who’s responsible 
for what.3 A government audit in June 2006 found that the program, one of the largest 
civilian IT projects undertaken worldwide, was progressing despite high-profile problems. 
In an effort to reduce cost overruns, the NHS program would no longer pay for products 
until delivery, shifting some financial responsibility to prime contractors, including BT 
Group, Accenture, and Fujitsu Services.4 On September 22, 2011, government officials 
in the United Kingdom announced that they were scrapping the National Programme for 
Health IT. Health Secretary Andrew Lansley said that the program “let down the NHS and 
wasted taxpayers’ money.”5
7.1a What Is Cost?
A popular cost accounting textbook states, “Accountants usually define cost as a resource 
sacrificed or foregone to achieve a specific objective.”6 Webster’s dictionary defines cost as 
“something given up in exchange.” Costs are often measured in monetary amounts, such 
as dollars, that must be paid to acquire goods and services. (For convenience, the exam-
ples in this chapter use dollars for monetary amounts.) Because projects cost money and 
consume resources that could be used elsewhere, it is very important for project managers 
to understand project cost management.
Many IT professionals, however, often react to cost overrun information with a smirk. 
They know that many of the original cost estimates for IT projects are low or based on 
unclear project requirements, so naturally there will be cost overruns. Not emphasizing 
the importance of realistic project cost estimates from the outset is only one part of the 
problem. In addition, many IT professionals think that preparing cost estimates is a job for 
accountants. On the contrary, preparing good cost estimates is a demanding, important 
skill that many professionals need to acquire.
Another perceived reason for cost overruns is that many IT projects involve new tech-
nology or business processes. Any new technology or business process is untested and has 
inherent risks. Thus, costs grow and failures are to be expected, right? Wrong. Using good 
project cost management can change this false perception.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS
266
7.1b What Is Project Cost Management?
Recall from Chapter 1 that the triple constraint of project management involves balancing 
scope, time, and cost goals. Chapters 5 and 6 discuss project scope and time management, 
and this chapter describes project cost management. Project cost management includes 
the processes required to ensure that a project team completes a project within an ap-
proved budget. Notice two crucial phrases in this definition: “a project” and “approved 
budget.” Project managers must make sure their projects are well defined, have accurate 
time and cost estimates, and have a realistic budget that they were involved in approving.
It is the project manager’s job to satisfy project stakeholders while continuously striv-
ing to reduce and control costs. There are four processes for project cost management:
1.  Planning cost management involves determining the policies, procedures, 
and documentation that will be used for planning, executing, and controlling 
project cost. The main output of this process is a cost management plan.
2.  Estimating costs involves developing an approximation or estimate of the 
costs of the resources needed to complete a project. The main outputs of the 
cost estimating process are activity cost estimates, basis of estimates, and 
project documents updates.
3.  Determining the budget involves allocating the overall cost estimate to in-
dividual work items to establish a baseline for measuring performance. The 
main outputs of the cost budgeting process are a cost baseline, project fund-
ing requirements, and project documents updates.
4.  Controlling costs involves controlling changes to the project budget. The 
main outputs of the cost control process are work performance information, 
cost forecasts, change requests, project management plan updates, project 
documents updates, and organizational process assets updates.
Figure 7-1 summarizes these processes and outputs, showing when they occur in a 
typical project.
To understand each of the project cost management processes, you must first under-
stand the basic principles of cost management. Many of these principles are not unique to 
project management; however, project managers need to understand how these principles 
relate to their specific projects.
7.2 BASIC PRINCIPLES OF COST MANAGEMENT
Many IT projects are never initiated because IT professionals do not understand the impor-
tance of basic accounting and finance principles. Important concepts such as net present 
value analysis, return on investment, and payback analysis were discussed in Chapter 4, 
Project Integration Management. Likewise, many projects that are started never finish  
because of cost management problems. Most members of an executive board have a better 
understanding of financial terms than IT terms, and are more interested in finance. There-
fore, IT project managers need to be able to present and discuss project information both 
in financial terms and technical terms. In addition to net present value analysis, return on 
investment, and payback analysis, project managers must understand several other cost 
management principles, concepts, and terms. This section describes general topics such 
as profits, life cycle costing, cash flow analysis, tangible and intangible costs and benefits, 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
1SPKFDU$PTU.BOBHFNFOU

direct costs, sunk costs, learning curve theory, and reserves. Another important topic—
earned value management—is one of the key tools and techniques for controlling project 
costs; it is described in detail in the section on cost control.
Profits are revenues minus expenditures. To increase profits, a company can increase 
revenues, decrease expenses, or try to do both. Most executives are more concerned with 
profits than with other issues. When justifying investments in new information systems 
and technology, it is important to focus on the impact on profits, not just revenues or  
expenses. Consider an e-commerce application that you estimate will increase revenues 
for a $100 million company by 10 percent. You cannot measure the potential benefits of 
the application without knowing the profit margin. Profit margin is the ratio of profits to 
revenues. If revenues of $100 generate $2 in profits, there is a 2 percent profit margin. If 
the company loses $2 for every $100 in revenue, there is a 22 percent profit margin.
Life cycle costing provides a big-picture view of the cost of a project throughout its 
life cycle. This helps you develop an accurate projection of a project’s financial costs and 
benefits. Life cycle costing considers the total cost of ownership, or development plus 
support costs, for a project. For example, a company might complete a project to develop 
and implement a new customer service system in 1 or 2 years, but the new system could 
be in place for 10 years. Project managers, with assistance from financial experts in their 
organizations, should create estimates of the costs and benefits of the project for its entire 
life cycle (10 years in the preceding example). Recall from Chapter 4 that the net present 
value analysis for the project would include the entire 10-year period of costs and ben-
efits. Top management and project managers need to consider the life cycle costs of proj-
ects when they make financial decisions.
FIGURE 7-1 1SPKFDUDPTUNBOBHFNFOUTVNNBSZ
Planning
Process:   Plan cost management
Outputs: Cost management plan
Process:   Estimate costs
Outputs:  Activity cost estimates, basis of estimates, project documents 
 
  updates
Process:   Determine budget
Outputs:  Cost baseline, project funding requirements, project 
 
  documents updates
 
Project Start
Project Finish
Monitoring and Controlling
Process:   Control costs
Outputs: Work performance information, cost forecasts, change requests,
 
project management plan updates, project documents updates,
 
organizational process assets updates
¥$FOHBHF-FBSOJOH
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS
268
M E D I A  S N A P S H O T
A primary goal of many projects is to achieve some type of financial benefits, measured 
using life cycle costing. Project success criteria often include reaching a certain return on 
investment (ROI) over the life cycle. You cannot measure ROI for projects if you do not 
have a benefits measurement process in place. How do you know if you earned or saved 
a certain amount each year after the project was completed if you do not have a way to 
measure it? According to a 2015 report by PMI:
t
Many organizations do not have a benefits measurement process at all.
t
Only twenty percent of organizations report having a high level of benefits  
realization maturity.
t
Thirty-nine percent of high-performing organizations report high benefits 
 realization maturity compared to nine percent of low performers.
“Organizations with mature benefits realization processes can benefit from: 
t
Clearly identifying the strategic rewards prior to starting a project
t
Effectively assessing and monitoring risks to project success
t
Proactively planning for making necessary changes in the organization
t
Explicitly defining accountability for project success
t
Routinely extending responsibility for integration to the project team.”7
Organizations have a history of not spending enough money in the early phases of  
IT projects, which affects total cost of ownership. For example, it is much more cost- 
effective to spend money on defining user requirements and doing early testing on IT proj-
ects than to wait for problems to appear after implementation. Recall from Chapter 5 that 
correcting a software defect late in a project costs much more than fixing the defect early.
Because organizations depend on reliable IT, huge costs are associated with downtime. 
t
When Facebook was down for 20 minutes on September 3, 2014, they lost  
a little more than $22,453 for every minute or more than $500,000.8
t
On August 19, 2013, Amazon.com went down for about 30 minutes, costing 
them $66,240 per minute or nearly $2 million.9
t
For Fortune 1000 companies, the average cost of an infrastructure failure 
is $100,000 per hour; the average cost of a critical application failure is 
$500,000 to $1 million per hour, or $8,300 to $16,600 per minute.10
t
In 2014, the average annual cost of unplanned application downtime in  
Fortune 1000 companies was $1.25 billion to $2.5 billion.11
W H A T  W E N T  R I G H T ?
An important cost-cutting strategy has been inspired by the global emphasis on improv-
ing the environment. Investing in green IT and other initiatives has helped both the envi-
ronment and companies’ bottom lines. Michael Dell, CEO of Dell, said he aimed to make 
continued
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
1SPKFDU$PTU.BOBHFNFOU
269
Cash flow analysis is a method for determining the estimated annual costs and benefits 
for a project and the resulting annual cash flow. Project managers must conduct cash flow 
analysis to determine net present value. Most consumers understand the basic concept of 
cash flow: If they do not have enough money in their wallets or bank accounts, they can-
not purchase something. Top management must consider cash flow concerns when select-
ing projects in which to invest. If top management selects too many projects that have high 
cash flow needs in the same year, the company will not be able to support all of its projects 
and maintain its profitability. It is also important to clarify the year used to analyze dollar 
amounts. For example, if a company bases all costs on 2012 estimates, it would need to  
account for inflation and other factors when projecting costs and benefits in future-year dollars.
Tangible and intangible costs and benefits are categories for determining how well an 
organization can define the estimated costs and benefits for a project. Tangible costs or 
benefits are easy to measure in dollars. For example, suppose that the Surveyor Pro proj-
ect described in the chapter’s opening case included a preliminary feasibility study. If a 
company completed this study for $100,000, its tangible cost is $100,000. If a government 
agency estimated that it could have done the study for $150,000, the tangible benefits of 
the study would be $50,000 to the government: It could pay for the study and then assign 
the government workers who would have done the study to other projects.
In contrast, intangible costs or benefits are difficult to measure in dollars. Suppose 
that Juan and a few other people spent their own personal time using government-owned 
computers, books, and other resources to research areas related to the study. Although 
their hours and the government-owned materials would not be billed to the project, they 
could be considered intangible costs. Intangible benefits for projects often include items 
like goodwill, prestige, and general statements of improved productivity that an organiza-
tion cannot easily translate into dollar amounts. Because intangible costs and benefits are 
difficult to quantify, they are often harder to justify.
Direct costs can be directly related to creating the products and services of the proj-
ect. You can attribute direct costs to a particular project. For example, direct costs include 
his company “carbon neutral” in 2008. “The computer giant is looking to zero-out 
its carbon emissions through a number of initiatives, such as offering small busi-
nesses and consumers curbside recycling of their old computers, stuffing small re-
cycling bags with free postage into new printer-ink cartridge boxes, and operating a 
‘Plant a Tree for Me’ program.”12 Dell did reach his goal; as of March 2012, Dell had 
helped its customers save almost $7 billion in energy costs.
Dell continues to practice corporate responsibility by helping the environ-
ment. In 2014, they reported the following progress: 
t
Recovered 230.9 million pounds of used electronics and are on track to 
reach our goal of 2 billion pounds by 2020
t
Reduced the average energy intensity of our product line by 23.2 percent 
compared to FY12
t
Decreased operational emissions by 10 percent
t
Used more than 10 million pounds of post-consumer recycled plastics 
in our products13
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS

the salaries of people working full time on the project and the cost of hardware and soft-
ware purchased specifically for the project. Project managers should focus on direct costs 
because they can be controlled.
Indirect costs are not directly related to the products or services of the project, but 
are indirectly related to performing work on the project. For example, indirect costs would 
include the cost of electricity, paper towels, and other necessities in a large building that 
houses 1,000 employees who work on many projects. Indirect costs are allocated to  
projects, and project managers have very little control over them.
Sunk cost is money that has been spent in the past. Consider it gone, like a sunken 
ship that can never be raised. When deciding what projects to invest in or continue, you 
should not include sunk costs. For example, in the chapter’s opening case, suppose that 
Juan’s office had spent $1 million on a project over the past three years to create a geo-
graphic information system, but had never produced anything valuable. If his government 
were evaluating what projects to fund next year and an official suggested continuing to 
fund the geographic information system project because $1 million had been spent on it 
already, the official would incorrectly be making sunk cost a key factor in the project se-
lection decision. Many people fall into the trap of continuing to spend money on a failing 
project because so much money has been spent on it already. This trap is similar to gam-
blers who continue betting because they have already lost money. Sunk costs should be 
forgotten, even though it is often difficult to think that way.
Learning curve theory states that when many items are produced repetitively, the 
unit cost of those items decreases in a regular pattern as more units are produced. For 
example, suppose that the Surveyor Pro project would potentially produce 1,000 handheld 
devices that could run the new software and access information via satellite. The cost of 
the first handheld unit would be much higher than the cost of the thousandth unit. Learn-
ing curve theory can help estimate costs on projects that involve the production of large 
quantities of items.
Learning curve theory also applies to the amount of time required to complete some 
tasks. For example, the first time a new employee performs a specific task, it will probably 
take longer than the tenth time that employee performs a very similar task. Effort esti-
mates, therefore, should be lower for more experienced workers.
Reserves are dollar amounts included in a cost estimate to mitigate cost risk by allow-
ing for future situations that are difficult to predict. Contingency reserves allow for future 
situations that may be partially planned for (sometimes called known unknowns) and are 
included in the project cost baseline. For example, if an organization knows it has a 20 
percent rate of turnover for IT personnel, it should include contingency reserves to pay 
for recruiting and training costs of IT personnel. Management reserves allow for future 
situations that are unpredictable (sometimes called unknown unknowns). For example, 
if a project manager gets sick for two weeks or an important supplier goes out of business, 
management reserve could be set aside to cover the resulting costs. Management reserves 
are not included in a cost baseline, as you will learn later in this chapter.
7.3 PLANNING COST MANAGEMENT
The first step in project cost management is planning how the costs will be managed 
throughout the life of the project. Project costs, like project schedules, grow out of the 
basic documents that initiate a project, like the project charter. The project manager and 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
૪ᕪᜰധጱ֕ฎဌํԾኞձ֜հ꧊ጱ᰸҅ࣁᬰᤈݸᬟ٬ᒽ෸ײӧଫᧆᘍᡤࣁٖ҅ӧଫᧆࢩԅ૪ᕪํԧဃဌᜰᩇ੪ᖀ
同样的产品进行大批量生
产，第一次的花费要远远
大于这批产品花费的平均
值，与学习曲线表现的进
程类似
同上，对于要做重复性工作
的人来说，第一次做这个工
作会因为不熟悉等因素造成
花费的时间比第十次第一百
次多很多，也可以利用学习
曲线来说明
1SPKFDU$PTU.BOBHFNFOU

other stakeholders use expert judgment, analytical techniques, and meetings to produce 
the cost management plan.
The cost management plan, like the scope and schedule management plans, can be 
informal and broad or formal and detailed, based on the needs of the project. In general, a 
cost management plan includes the following information: 
t
Level of accuracy: Activity cost estimates normally have rounding guidelines, 
such as rounding to the nearest $100. There may also be guidelines for the 
amount of contingency funds to include, such as 10 or 20 percent.
t
Units of measure: Each unit used in cost measurements, such as labor hours 
or days, should be defined.
t
Organizational procedures links: Many organizations refer to the work 
breakdown structure (WBS) component used for project cost accounting as 
the control account (CA). Each control account is often assigned a unique 
code that is used in the organization’s accounting system. Project teams must 
understand and use these codes properly.
t
Control thresholds: Similar to schedule variance, costs often have a specified 
amount of variation allowed before action needs to be taken, such as ±10 per-
cent of the baseline cost.
t
Rules of performance measurement: If the project uses earned value man-
agement (EVM), as described later in this chapter, the cost management 
plan would define measurement rules, such as how often actual costs will be 
tracked and to what level of detail.
t
Reporting formats: This section would describe the format and frequency of 
cost reports required for the project.
t
Process descriptions: The cost management plan would also describe how to 
perform all of the cost management processes.
7.4 ESTIMATING COSTS
Project managers must take cost estimates seriously if they want to complete projects 
within budget constraints. After developing a good resource requirements list, project 
managers and their project teams must develop several estimates of the costs for these 
resources. Recall from Chapter 6 that an important process in project time management is 
estimating activity resources, which provides a list of activity resource requirements. For 
example, if an activity for a project is to perform a particular type of test, the list of activ-
ity resource requirements would describe the skill level of the people needed to perform 
the test, the number of people and hours suggested to perform the test, the need for spe-
cial software or equipment, and other requirements. All of this information is required to 
develop a good cost estimate. This section describes various types of cost estimates, tools 
and techniques for estimating costs, typical problems associated with IT cost estimates, 
and a detailed example of a cost estimate for an IT project.
7.4a Types of Cost Estimates
One of the main outputs of project cost management is a cost estimate. Project managers 
normally prepare several types of cost estimates for most projects. Three basic types of 
estimates include the following: 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
度
位
组织性程
序
的链接
，
限
准
$IBQUFS

t
A rough order of magnitude (ROM) estimate provides an estimate of what a 
project will cost. A ROM estimate can also be referred to as a ballpark estimate, 
a guesstimate, a swag, or a broad gauge. This type of estimate is done very early 
in a project or even before a project is officially started. Project managers and 
top management use this estimate to help make project selection decisions. The 
time frame for this type of estimate is often three or more years prior to project 
completion. A ROM estimate’s accuracy is typically -50 percent to +100 percent, 
meaning the project’s actual costs could be 50 percent below the ROM estimate 
or 100 percent above. For example, the actual cost for a project with a ROM 
estimate of $100,000 could range from $50,000 to $200,000. For IT project esti-
mates, this accuracy range is often much wider. Many IT professionals automati-
cally double estimates for software development because of the history of cost 
overruns on IT projects.
t
A budgetary estimate is used to allocate money into an organization’s bud-
get. Many organizations develop budgets at least two years into the future. 
Budgetary estimates are made one to two years prior to project completion. 
The accuracy of budgetary estimates is typically -10 percent to +25 percent, 
meaning the actual costs could be 10 percent less or 25 percent more than 
the budgetary estimate. For example, the actual cost for a project with a bud-
getary estimate of $100,000 could range from $90,000 to $125,000.
t
A definitive estimate provides an accurate estimate of project costs. Defini-
tive estimates are used for making many purchasing decisions for which 
accurate estimates are required and for estimating final project costs. For 
example, if a project involves purchasing 1,000 personal computers from an 
outside supplier in the next three months, a definitive estimate would be re-
quired to aid in evaluating supplier proposals and allocating the funds to pay 
the chosen supplier. Definitive estimates are made one year or less prior to 
project completion. A definitive estimate should be the most accurate of the 
three types of estimates. The accuracy of this type of estimate is normally -5 
percent to +10 percent, meaning the actual costs could be 5 percent less or 
10 percent more than the definitive estimate. For example, the actual cost 
for a project with a definitive estimate of $100,000 could range from $95,000 
to $110,000. Table 7-1 summarizes the three basic types of cost estimates.
TABLE 7-1 5ZQFTPGDPTUFTUJNBUFT
Type of Estimate
When Done
Why Done
How Accurate
Rough order of 
magnitude (ROM)
Very early in the project life 
cycle, often 3–5 years before 
project completion
Provides estimate of cost for 
selection decisions
-50% to +100%
Budgetary
Early, 1–2 years out
Puts dollars in the budget 
plans
-10% to +25%
Definitive
Later in the project, less than  
1 year out
Provides details for 
purchases, estimates  
actual costs
-5% to +10%
© Cengage Learning 2016
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
1SPKFDU$PTU.BOBHFNFOU

The number and type of cost estimates vary by application area. For example, the  
Association for the Advancement of Cost Engineering (AACE) International identifies five 
types of cost estimates for construction projects: order of magnitude, conceptual, prelimi-
nary, definitive, and control. The main point is that estimates are usually done at various 
stages of a project and should become more accurate as time progresses.
In addition to creating cost estimates for the entire project and activity cost esti-
mates, it is also important to provide supporting details for the estimates and updates to 
project documents. The supporting details include the ground rules and assumptions used 
in creating the estimate, a description of the project (such as scope statement and WBS) 
used as a basis for the estimate, and details on the cost estimation tools and techniques 
used to create the estimate. These supporting details should make it easier to prepare an 
updated estimate or similar estimate as needed.
Another important consideration in preparing cost estimates is labor costs, because a 
large percentage of total project costs are often labor costs. Many organizations estimate 
the number of people or hours they need by department or skill over the life cycle of a 
project. For example, when Northwest Airlines developed initial cost estimates for its res-
ervation system project, ResNet, it determined the maximum number of full-time equiva-
lent (FTE) staff it could assign to the project each year by department. Table 7-2 shows 
this information. Note the small number of contractors that Northwest Airlines planned 
to use. Labor costs are often much higher for contractors, so it is important to distinguish 
between internal and external resources. (See the companion website for this text to read 
the detailed case study on ResNet, including cost estimates.)
TABLE 7-2 .BYJNVN'5&CZEFQBSUNFOUCZZFBS
Department
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Year 5
Totals
Information systems
24
31
35
13
13
116
Marketing systems
3
3
3
3
3
15
Reservations
12
29
33
9
7
90
Contractors
2
3
1
0
0
6
Totals
41
66
72
25
23
227
© Cengage Learning 2016
7.4b Cost Estimation Tools and Techniques
As you can imagine, developing a good cost estimate is difficult. Fortunately, several tools 
and techniques are available to assist in creating one. These tools and techniques include 
expert judgment, analogous cost estimating, bottom-up estimating, three-point estimating, 
parametric estimating, the cost of quality, project management estimating software, ven-
dor bid analysis, and reserve analysis.
Analogous estimates, also called top-down estimates, use the actual cost of a pre-
vious, similar project as the basis for estimating the cost of the current project. This 
technique requires a good deal of expert judgment and is generally less costly than other 
techniques, but it is also less accurate. Analogous estimates are most reliable when the 
previous projects are similar in fact, not just in appearance. In addition, the groups 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS

preparing cost estimates must have the needed expertise to determine whether certain 
parts of the project will be more or less expensive than analogous projects. For example, 
estimators often try to find a similar project and then customize or modify it for known 
differences. However, if the project to be estimated involves a new programming language 
or working with a new type of hardware or network, the analogous estimate technique 
could easily result in too low an estimate.
Bottom-up estimates involve estimating the costs of individual work items or activi-
ties and summing them to get a project total. This approach is sometimes referred to as 
activity-based costing. The size of the individual work items and the experience of the 
estimators drive the accuracy of the estimates. If a detailed WBS is available for a project, 
the project manager could require each person who is responsible for a work package to 
develop a cost estimate for that work package, or at least an estimate of the amount of re-
sources required. Someone in the financial area of an organization often provides resource 
cost rates, such as labor rates or costs per pound of materials, which can be entered into 
project management software to calculate costs. The software automatically calculates 
information to create cost estimates for each level of the WBS and finally for the entire 
project. Using smaller work items increases the accuracy of the cost estimate because the 
people assigned to do the work develop the cost estimate instead of someone unfamiliar 
with the work. The drawback with bottom-up estimates is that they are usually time-
intensive and therefore expensive to develop.
Three-point estimates involve estimating the most likely, optimistic, and pessimistic 
costs for items. You can use a formula like the PERT weighted average described in  
Chapter 6, Project Time Management, to calculate cost estimates or use a Monte Carlo 
simulation, described in Chapter 11, Project Risk Management.
Parametric estimating uses project characteristics (parameters) in a mathematical 
model to estimate project costs. For example, a parametric model might provide an es-
timate of $50 per line of code for a software development project based on the program-
ming language the project is using, the level of expertise of the programmers, the size and 
complexity of the data involved, and so on. Parametric models are most reliable when the 
historical information used to create the model is accurate, the parameters are readily 
quantifiable, and the model is flexible in terms of the project’s size. Many projects involv-
ing building construction use parametric estimates based on cost per square foot. The 
costs vary based on the quality of construction, location, materials, and other factors. In 
practice, many people find that using a combination or hybrid approach with analogous, 
bottom-up, three-point, and parametric estimating provides the best cost estimates.
Other considerations when preparing cost estimates are how much to include in re-
serves, as described earlier; the cost of quality, as described in Chapter 8, Project Quality 
Management; and other cost estimating methods such as vendor bid analysis, as described 
in Chapter 12, Project Procurement Management. Using software to assist in cost  
estimating is described later in this chapter.
7.4c Typical Problems with IT Cost Estimates
Although many tools and techniques can assist in creating project cost estimates, many 
IT project cost estimates are still very inaccurate, especially those for new technologies or 
software development. Tom DeMarco, a well-known author on software development, sug-
gests four reasons for these inaccuracies and some ways to overcome them.14
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
1SPKFDU$PTU.BOBHFNFOU

t
Estimates are done too quickly. Developing an estimate for a large software 
project is a complex task that requires significant effort. Many estimates must 
be done quickly and before clear system requirements have been produced. For 
example, the Surveyor Pro project described in the opening case involves a lot of 
complex software development. Before fully understanding what information sur-
veyors need in the system, someone would have to create a ROM estimate and 
budgetary estimates for this project. Rarely are the more precise, later cost esti-
mates less than the earlier estimates for IT projects. It is important to remember 
that estimates are done at various stages of the project, and project managers 
need to explain the rationale for each estimate.
t
People lack estimating experience. The people who develop software cost 
estimates often do not have much experience with cost estimation, especially 
for large projects. They also do not have enough accurate, reliable project 
data on which to base estimates. If an organization uses good project man-
agement techniques and develops a history of keeping reliable project infor-
mation, including estimates, the organization’s estimates should improve. 
Enabling IT people to receive training and mentoring on cost estimating will 
also improve cost estimates.
t
Human beings are biased toward underestimation. For example, senior IT 
professionals or project managers might make estimates based on their own 
abilities and forget that many younger people will be working on a project. 
Estimators might also forget to allow for extra costs needed for integration 
and testing on large IT projects. It is important for project managers and top 
management to review estimates and ask important questions to make sure 
the estimates are not biased.
t
Management desires accuracy. Management might ask for an estimate but 
really want a more accurate number to help them create a bid to win a ma-
jor contract or get internal funding. This problem is similar to the situation 
discussed in Chapter 6, Project Time Management, in which top managers or 
other stakeholders want project schedules to be shorter than the estimates. 
It is important for project managers to help develop good cost and schedule 
estimates and to use their leadership and negotiation skills to stand by those 
estimates.
It is also important to be cautious with initial estimates. Top management never for-
gets the first estimate and rarely, if ever, remembers how approved changes affect the 
estimate. It is a never-ending and crucial process to keep top management informed about 
revised cost estimates. It should be a formal process, albeit a possibly painful one.
7.4d How to Develop a Cost Estimate
One of the best ways to learn how the cost estimating process works is by studying sample 
cost estimates. Every cost estimate is unique, just as every project is unique. You can see 
a short sample cost estimate in Chapter 3 for JWD Consulting’s project management in-
tranet site project. You can also view the ResNet cost estimate on the companion website 
for this text.
This section includes a step-by-step approach for developing a cost estimate for the 
Surveyor Pro project described in the opening case. Of course, it is much shorter and 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS

simpler than a real cost estimate, but it illustrates a process to follow and uses several of 
the tools and techniques described earlier.
Before beginning a cost estimate, you must gather as much information as possible 
about the project and ask how the organization plans to use the cost estimate. If the cost 
estimate will be the basis for contract awards and performance reporting, it should be a 
definitive estimate and as accurate as possible, as described earlier.
It is also important to clarify the ground rules and assumptions for the estimate. The 
Surveyor Pro project cost estimate includes the following ground rules and assumptions:
t
This project was preceded by a detailed study and proof of concept to show that 
it was possible to develop the hardware and software needed by surveyors and 
link the new devices to existing information systems. The proof of concept proj-
ect produced a prototype handheld device and much of the software to provide 
basic functionality and link to the Global Positioning System (GPS) and other 
government databases used by surveyors. Some data is available to help estimate 
future labor costs, especially for the software development, and to help estimate 
the cost of the handheld devices.
t
The main goal of this project is to produce 100 handheld devices, continue 
developing the software (especially the user interface), test the new system in 
the field, and train 100 surveyors in selected cities to use the new system. A 
follow-up contract is expected for a much larger number of devices based on 
the success of this project.
t
The project has the following WBS: 
 
 
1. Project management
 
 
2. Hardware
 
 
2.1 Handheld devices
 
 
2.2 Servers
 
 
3. Software
 
 
3.1 Licensed software
 
 
3.2 Software development
 
 
4. Testing
 
 
5. Training and support
 
 
6. Reserves
t
Costs must be estimated by WBS and by month. The project manager will re-
port progress on the project using earned value analysis, which requires this 
type of estimate.
t
Costs will be provided in U.S. dollars. Because the project length is one year, 
inflation will not be included.
t
The project will be managed by the government’s project office. The project 
will require a part-time project manager and four team members. The team 
members will help manage various parts of the project and provide their 
expertise in the areas of software development, training, and support. Their 
total hours will be allocated as follows: 25 percent to project management,  
25 percent to software development, 25 percent to training and support, and 
25 percent to non-project work.
t
The project involves purchasing the handheld devices from the same com-
pany that developed the prototype device. Based on producing 100 devices, 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
1SPKFDU$PTU.BOBHFNFOU

the cost rate is estimated to be $600 per unit. The project will require four 
additional servers to run the software required for the devices and for manag-
ing the project.
t
The project requires purchased software licenses for accessing the GPS and 
three other external systems. Software development includes developing a 
graphical user interface for the devices, an online help system, and a new 
module for tracking surveyor performance using the device.
t
Testing costs should be low due to the success of the prototype project. An 
estimate based on multiplying the total hardware and software estimates by 
10 percent should be sufficient.
t
Training will include instructor-led classes in five different locations. The 
project team believes it will be best to outsource most of the training, includ-
ing developing course materials, holding the sessions, and providing help desk 
support for three months as the surveyors start using their devices in the field.
t
Because several risks are related to this project, include 20 percent of the  
total estimate as reserves.
t
You must develop a computer model for the estimate so that you can easily 
change several inputs, such as the number of labor hours for various activi-
ties or labor rates.
Fortunately, the project team can easily access cost estimates and actual information 
from similar projects. A great deal of information is available from the proof of concept 
project, and the team can also talk to contractors from the past project to help them de-
velop the estimate. Computer models are also available, such as a software-estimating tool 
based on function points. Function points are a means of measuring software size based 
on what the software does for end users. Function points are comprised of inputs, outputs, 
inquiries, internal data, and external interface data. Allen Albrecht initially defined this 
metric in the 1970s, and today it is the international standard used to measure software 
size. It is the most commonly used software size metric, followed by lines of code.15
Because the estimate must be provided by WBS and by month, the team first reviews 
a draft of the project schedule. The team decides to begin by estimating the cost of each 
WBS item and then determine when the work will be performed, even though costs may 
be incurred at different times than when the work is performed. The team’s budget expert 
has approved this approach for the estimate. The team has further assumptions and infor-
mation for estimating the costs for each WBS category:
 
1.    Project management: Estimate based on compensation for the part-time  
project manager and 25 percent of the four team members’ time. The bud-
get expert for this project suggested using a labor rate of $100/hour for the 
project manager and $75/hour for each team member, based on working an 
average of 160 hours per month, full time. Therefore, the total hours for the 
project manager under this category are 960 (160/2 * 12 5 960). Costs are 
also included for the four project team members who are each working  
25 percent of their time: a total of 160 hours per month for all project 
 personnel (160 * 12 5 1920). An additional amount for all contracted labor 
is estimated by multiplying 10 percent of the total estimates for software 
 development and testing costs (10% * ($594,000 + $69,000)).
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS

 
2.    Hardware
 
  2.1    Handheld devices: 100 devices estimated by contractor at $600 per 
unit.
 
  2.2    Servers: Four servers estimated at $4,000 each, based on recent server 
purchases.
 
3.    Software
 
  3.1    Licensed software: License costs will be negotiated with each supplier. 
Because there is a strong probability of large future contracts and great 
publicity if the system works well, costs are expected to be lower than 
usual. A cost of $200/handheld device will be used.
 
  3.2    Software development: This estimate will include two approaches: a 
labor estimate and a function point estimate. The higher estimate will 
be used. If the estimates differ by more than 20 percent, the project 
will require a third estimation approach. The supplier who developed 
the proof of concept project will provide the labor estimate input, and 
local technical experts will make the function point estimates.
 
4.    Testing: Based on similar projects, testing will be estimated as 10 percent of 
the total hardware and software cost.
 
5.    Training and support: Based on similar projects, training will be estimated 
on a per-trainee basis, plus travel costs. The cost per trainee (100 total) will 
be $500, and travel will cost $700/day/person for the instructors and project 
team members. The team estimates that the project will require a total of 12 
travel days. Labor costs for the project team members will be added to this 
estimate because they will assist in training and providing support after the 
training. The labor hours estimate for team members is 1,920 hours total.
 
6.    Reserves: As directed, reserves will be estimated at 20 percent of the total 
estimate.
The project team then develops a cost model using the preceding information.  
Figure 7-2 shows a spreadsheet that summarizes the costs by WBS item. Notice that the 
WBS items are listed in the first column, and some are broken down into more detail 
based on how the costs are estimated. For example, the project management category is 
broken down into three subcategories because the project manager, team members, and 
contractors will each perform project management activities that must be accounted for in 
the costs. Also notice the columns for entering the number of units or hours and the cost 
per unit or hour. Several items are estimated using this approach. The estimate includes 
some short comments, such as reserves being 20 percent of the total estimate. Also notice 
that you can easily change several input variables, such as number of hours or cost per 
hour, to revise the estimate.
The asterisk by the software development item in Figure 7-2 provides reference for de-
tailed information on how this more complicated estimate was made. Recall the assumption 
that software development must be estimated using two approaches, and that the higher esti-
mate would be used as long as both estimates differed by no more than 20 percent. The labor 
estimate was used in this case because it was slightly higher than the function point estimate 
($594,000 versus $567,000). Figure 7-3 shows how the function point estimate was made, 
and the Best Practice feature provides more information on function point estimates. As you 
can see, many assumptions were made in producing the function point estimate. By putting 
the information into a cost model, you can easily change several inputs to adjust the estimate.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
1SPKFDU$PTU.BOBHFNFOU

# Units/Hrs. Cost/Unit/Hr.
Subtotals
WBS Level 2 Totals % of Total
WBS Items
1. Project Management
$306,300
20%
Project manager
$100
$96,000
Project team members
$75
$144,000
Contractors (10% of software
development and testing)
$66,300
2. Hardware
$76,000
5%
2.1  Handheld devices
$600
$60,000
2.2  Servers
$4,000
$16,000
3. Software
$614,000
40%
3.1 Licensed software
$200
$20,000
3.2 Software development*
$594,000
4. Testing (10% of total hardware
and software costs)
$69,000
$69,000
5%
5. Training and Support
$202,400
13%
Trainee cost
$500
$50,000
Travel cost
$700
$8,400
Project team members
$75
$144,000
6. Reserves (20% of total estimate)
$253,540
$253,540
17%
Total project cost estimate
$1,521,240
*See software development estimate.
960
1920
100
4
100
100
12
1920
Subtotal
$1,267,700
Surveyor Pro Project Cost Estimate Created October 5
FIGURE 7-2 4VSWFZPS1SPQSPKFDUDPTUFTUJNBUF
¥$FOHBHF-FBSOJOH
FIGURE 7-3 4VSWFZPS1SPTPGUXBSFEFWFMPQNFOUFTUJNBUF
¥$FOHBHF-FBSOJOH
Surveyor Pro Software Development Estimate Created October 5
    1. Labor Estimate
# Units/Hrs. Cost/Unit/Hr. Subtotals
Calculations
Contractor labor estimate
3000
$150
$450,000
3000 ! 150
Project team member estimate
1920
$75
$144,000
1920 ! 75
Total labor estimate
$594,000
Sum above two values
    2.  Function point estimate
Quantity
Conversion
Factor
Function
Points
Calculations
External inputs
10
4
40
10 ! 4
External interface ﬁles
3
7
21
3 ! 7
External outputs
4
5
20
4 ! 5
External queries
6
4
24
6 ! 4
Logical internal tables
7
10
70
7 !10
Total function points
175
Sum above function point
values
Java 2 language equivalency
value
46
Assumed value from
reference
Source lines of code (SLOC) estimate
8,050
175 ! 46
Productivity×KSLOC^Penalty
(in months)
29.28
3.13 ! 8.05^1.072
(see reference)
Total labor hours
(27 hours/function point)*
4,725
27*175
Cost/labor hour ($120/hour)
$120
Assumed value from
budget expert
Total function point estimate
$567,000
4,725 ! 120
* Based on historical data
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS

B E S T  P R A C T I C E
Software expert and author Alvin Alexander shared his knowledge on the challenging 
topic of estimating software development costs in several presentations and a book called 
Cost Estimating in an Agile Development Environment (2015). Alexander describes how 
to use Function Point Analysis (FPA) techniques based on his personal experience work-
ing on a multimillion dollar software project over five years. (Recall that function points 
are a means of measuring software size in terms that are meaningful to end users.) The 
project initially used a more traditional, waterfall approach but later moved to a more 
agile approach.
Alexander explained that at the beginning of the project, when requirements  
documents were very long and detailed, the programming work took about three times 
the amount of time that was required to create the requirements (a ratio of 3:1). Later 
in the project, after their client trusted them more and actually knew the developers 
by name, the requirements were much shorter (more like user stories), and the ratio of 
programming work to requirements work was much higher—6:1 to 9.5:1. User stories 
describe what users do or need to do as part of their job function, focusing on the “who,” 
“what,” and “why” of a requirement in a simple, concise way. Developers can analyze 
user stories to estimate the number of internal logical files (ILFs)—a group of logically re-
lated data that resides entirely within the application boundary and is maintained through  
external inputs. You can then use the ILFs to approximate the number of function points, 
and then multiply by a certain number of hours/function point to estimate the  
person-hours needed to develop the software.16
World class organizations take about half as long as average organizations (19 versus 
35 hours) to develop one function point. They use consistent documentation (for require-
ments, analysis, and use cases), they follow consistent processes for developing software, 
and their technical staff focus on business instead of technology. “It is impossible to  
separate world-class organizations from world-class metrics organizations.”17
It is very important to have several people review the project cost estimate. It is also 
helpful to analyze the total dollar value as well as the percentage of the total amount for 
each major WBS category. For example, a senior executive could quickly look at the  
Surveyor Pro project cost estimate and decide if the numbers are reasonable and the  
assumptions are well documented. In this case, the government had budgeted $1.5 million 
for the project, so the estimate was in line with that amount. The WBS Level 2 items, such 
as project management, hardware, software, and testing, also seemed to be at appropriate  
percentages of the total cost based on similar past projects. In some cases, a project team 
might also be asked to provide a range estimate for each item instead of one discrete 
amount. For example, the team might estimate that the testing costs will be between 
$60,000 and $80,000 and document their assumptions in determining those values. 
It is also important to update cost estimates, especially if any major changes occur on 
a project.
After the total cost estimate is approved, the team can then allocate costs for each 
month based on the project schedule and when costs will be incurred. Many organizations 
also require that the estimated costs be allocated into certain budget categories, as  
described in the next section.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
1SPKFDU$PTU.BOBHFNFOU

7.5 DETERMINING THE BUDGET
Determining the budget involves allocating the project cost estimate to individual mate-
rial resources or work items over time. These material resources or work items are based 
on the activities in the work breakdown structure for the project. The cost management 
plan, scope baseline, activity cost estimates, basis of estimates, project schedule, resource 
calendars, risk register, agreements, and organizational process assets are all inputs for 
determining the budget. The main goal of the cost budgeting process is to produce a cost 
baseline for measuring project performance and to determine project funding require-
ments. The process may also result in project documents updates, such as items being 
added, removed, or modified in the scope statement or project schedule.
The Surveyor Pro project team would use the cost estimate from Figure 7-2 along with 
the project schedule and other information to allocate costs for each month. Figure 7-4 
provides an example of a cost baseline for this project. A cost baseline is a time-phased 
budget that project managers use to measure and monitor cost performance. Again, it’s 
important for team members to document assumptions they made when developing the 
cost baseline and have several experts review it.
Most organizations have a well-established process for preparing budgets. For example, 
many organizations require budget estimates to include the number of FTE for each month 
of the project. One FTE normally means 40 hours of work. One person could be assigned 
full-time to a project to provide one FTE, or two people could be assigned half-time to pro-
vide one FTE. This number provides the basis for estimating total compensation costs each 
year. Many organizations also want to know the amount of money projected to be paid to 
suppliers for their labor costs or other purchased goods and services. Other common  
budget categories include travel, depreciation, rents and leases, and other supplies and ex-
penses. It is important to understand these budget categories before developing an estimate 
to make sure data is collected accordingly. Organizations use this information to track costs 
across projects and non-project work and to look for ways to reduce costs. They also use the 
information for legal and tax purposes.
FIGURE 7-4 4VSWFZPS1SPQSPKFDUDPTUCBTFMJOF
¥$FOHBHF-FBSOJOH
WBS Items
1.   Project Management
1.1 Project manager
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
96,000
1.2 Project team members
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
144,000
1.3 Contractors
6,027
6,027
6,027
6,027
6,027
6,027
6,027
6,027
6,027
6,027
6,027
66,300
2. Hardware
    2.1 Handheld devices
30,000
30,000
60,000
    2.2 Servers
8,000
8,000
16,000
3. Software
    3.1 Licensed software
10,000
10,000
20,000
    3.2 Software development
60,000
60,000
80,000 127,000
127,000
90,000
50,000
594,000
4. Testing
6,000
8,000
12,000
15,000
15,000
13,000
69,000
5. Training and Support
     5.1 Trainee cost
50,000
50,000
     5.2 Travel cost
8,400
8,400
     5.3 Project team members
24,000
24,000
24,000
24,000
24,000
24,000
144,000
6. Reserves
10,000
10,000
30,000
30,000
60,000
40,000
40,000
30,000
3,540
253,540
                   Totals
20,000
86,027
92,027
172,027 223,027
198,027
185,027
173,027
148,427
90,027
80,027
53,567
1,521,240
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Totals
*See the lecture slides for this chapter on the companion website for a larger view of this and other
ﬁgures in this chapter. Numbers are rounded, so some totals appear to be off.
Surveyor Pro Project Cost Baseline Created October 10*
Months
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS
282
In addition to providing a cost baseline, estimating costs for each major project ac-
tivity over time provides project managers and top management with a foundation for 
project cost control, as described in the next section. Cost budgeting, as well as requested 
changes or clarifications, may result in updates to the cost management plan, which is a 
subsidiary part of the project management plan. See Appendix A for information on using 
Project 2013 for cost control.
Cost budgeting also provides information for project funding requirements. Some 
projects have all funds available when the project begins, but others must rely on peri-
odic funding to avoid cash flow problems. If the cost baseline shows that more funds are 
required in certain months than are expected to be available, the organization must make 
adjustments to avoid financial problems.
7.6 CONTROLLING COSTS
Controlling project costs includes monitoring cost performance, ensuring that only ap-
propriate project changes are included in a revised cost baseline, and informing project 
stakeholders of authorized changes to the project that will affect costs. The project man-
agement plan, project funding requirements, work performance data, and organizational 
process assets are inputs for controlling costs. Outputs of this process are work perfor-
mance information, cost forecasts, change requests, project management plan updates, 
project documents updates, and organizational process asset updates.
 Several tools and techniques assist in project cost control. As shown in Appendix A, 
Project 2013 has many cost management features to help you enter budgeted costs, set a 
baseline, enter actuals, calculate variances, and run various cost reports.
In addition to using software, however, you need a change control system to define 
procedures for changing the cost baseline. This cost control change system is part of the 
integrated change control system described in Chapter 4, Project Integration Management. 
Because many projects do not progress exactly as planned, new or revised cost estimates 
are often required, as are estimates to evaluate alternate courses of action.
Performance review meetings can be a powerful tool for helping to control project costs. 
People often perform better when they know they must report on their progress. Another 
very important tool for cost control is performance measurement. Although many general ac-
counting approaches are available for measuring cost performance, earned value management 
(EVM) is a powerful cost control technique that is unique to the field of project management.
7.6a Earned Value Management
Earned value management (EVM) is a project performance measurement technique that 
integrates scope, time, and cost data. Given a cost performance baseline, project manag-
ers and their teams can determine how well the project is meeting scope, time, and cost 
goals by entering actual information and then comparing it to the baseline. A baseline is 
the budget figure in the original project plan plus approved changes. Actual information 
includes whether or not a WBS item was completed, approximately how much of the work 
was completed, when the work actually started and ended, and how much the completed 
work actually cost.
In the past, earned value management was used primarily on large government proj-
ects. Today, however, more and more companies are realizing the value of using this tool 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
1SPKFDU$PTU.BOBHFNFOU

to help control costs. Moreover, a discussion by several academic experts in earned value 
management and a real practitioner revealed the need to clarify how to calculate earned 
value. Brenda Taylor, a senior project manager for P2 Project Management Solutions in  
Johannesburg, South Africa, questioned the accuracy of calculating earned value simply 
by multiplying the planned value to date by a percentage complete value. She suggested 
using the rate of performance instead, as described below.
Earned value management involves calculating three values for each activity or sum-
mary activity from a project’s WBS.
 
1.    The planned value (PV), also called the budget, is the portion of the  
approved total cost estimate planned to be spent on an activity during a 
given period. Table 7-3 shows an example of earned value calculations.  
Suppose that a project included a summary activity of purchasing and  
installing a new web server. Suppose further that, according to the plan,  
it would take one week and cost a total of $10,000 for the labor hours,  
hardware, and software. Therefore, the planned value (PV) for the activity 
that week is $10,000.
 
2.    The actual cost (AC) is the total direct and indirect costs incurred in ac-
complishing work on an activity during a given period. For example, suppose 
that it actually took two weeks and cost $20,000 to purchase and install the 
new web server. Assume that $15,000 of these actual costs were incurred 
during Week 1 and $5,000 was incurred during Week 2. These amounts are 
the actual cost (AC) for the activity each week.
 
3.    The earned value (EV) is an estimate of the value of the physical work actu-
ally completed. EV is based on the original planned costs for the project or 
activity and the rate at which the team is completing work on the project 
or activity to date. The rate of performance (RP) is the ratio of actual work 
completed to the percentage of work planned to have been completed at any 
given time during the life of the project or activity. For example, suppose 
that the server installation was halfway completed by the end of Week 1. 
The rate of performance would be 50 percent because by the end of Week 1, 
the planned schedule reflects that the task should be complete but only  
50  percent of the work has been completed. In Table 7-3, the earned value 
estimate after one week is therefore $5,000.18
TABLE 7-3 &BSOFEWBMVFDBMDVMBUJPOTGPSPOFBDUJWJUZBGUFS8FFL
Activity
 Week 1
Earned value (EV)
5,000
Planned value (PV)
10,000
Actual cost (AC)
15,000
Cost variance (CV)
-10,000
Schedule variance (SV)
-5,000
Cost performance index (CPI)
33%
Schedule performance index (SPI)
50%
© Cengage Learning 2016
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS
284
The earned value calculations in Table 7-4 are carried out as follows:
EV 5 10,000 * 50% 5 5,000
CV 5 5,000 - 15,000 5 -10,000
SV 5 5,000 - 10,000 5 -5,000
CPI 5 5,000/15,000 5 33%
SPI 5 5,000/10,000 5 50%
Table 7-4 summarizes the formulas used in earned value management. Note that the 
formulas for variances and indexes start with EV, the earned value. Variances are calcu-
lated by subtracting the actual cost or planned value from EV, and indexes are calculated 
by dividing EV by the actual cost or planned value. After you total the EV, AC, and PV data 
for all activities on a project, you can use the CPI and SPI to project how much it will cost 
and how long it will take to finish the project based on performance to date. Given the 
budget at completion and original time estimate, you can divide by the appropriate index 
to calculate the estimate at completion (EAC) and estimated time to complete, assuming 
that performance remains the same. There are no standard acronyms for the terms  
estimated time to complete or original time estimate.
Cost variance (CV) is the earned value minus the actual cost. If cost variance is a neg-
ative number, it means that performing the work cost more than planned. If cost variance 
is a positive number, performing the work cost less than planned.
Schedule variance (SV) is the earned value minus the planned value. A negative 
schedule variance means that it took longer than planned to perform the work, and  
a positive schedule variance means that the work took less time than planned.
The cost performance index (CPI) is the ratio of earned value to actual cost; it can be 
used to estimate the projected cost of completing the project. If the CPI is equal to one, or 
100 percent, then the planned and actual costs are equal—the costs are exactly as bud-
geted. If the CPI is less than one or less than 100 percent, the project is over budget. If the 
CPI is greater than one or more than 100 percent, the project is under budget.
The schedule performance index (SPI) is the ratio of earned value to planned value; 
it can be used to estimate the projected time to complete the project. Similar to the cost 
performance index, an SPI of one, or 100 percent, means the project is on schedule. If the 
SPI is greater than one or 100 percent, then the project is ahead of schedule. If the SPI is 
less than one or 100 percent, the project is behind schedule.
TABLE 7-4 &BSOFEWBMVFGPSNVMBT
Term
Formula
Earned value (EV)
EV 5 PV to date * RP
Cost variance (CV)
CV 5 EV - AC
Schedule variance (SV)
SV 5 EV - PV
Cost performance index (CPI)
CPI 5 EV/AC
Schedule performance index (SPI)
SPI 5 EV/PV
Estimate at completion (EAC)
EAC 5 BAC/CPI
Estimated time to complete
Original time estimate/SPI
© Cengage Learning 2016
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
1SPKFDU$PTU.BOBHFNFOU
285
Note that in general, negative numbers for cost and schedule variance indicate prob-
lems in those areas. Negative numbers mean the project is costing more than planned or 
taking longer than planned. Likewise, a CPI and SPI of less than one or less than 100 per-
cent also indicate problems.
The cost performance index can be used to calculate the estimate at completion (EAC)—
an estimated cost of completing a project based on performance to date. Similarly, the sched-
ule performance index can be used to calculate an estimated time to complete the project.
You can graph earned value information to track project performance. Figure 7-5 
shows an earned value chart for a one-year project after five months. Note that the actual 
cost and earned value lines end at five months because the data was collected or esti-
mated at that point. The chart includes three lines and two points, as follows: 
t
Planned value (PV), the cumulative planned amounts for all activities by month. 
Note that the planned value line extends for the estimated length of the project 
and ends at the BAC point.
t
Actual cost (AC), the cumulative actual amounts for all activities by month.
t
Earned value (EV), the cumulative earned value amounts for all activities by 
month.
t
Budget at completion (BAC), the original total budget for the project, or 
$100,000 in this example. The BAC point is plotted on the chart at the origi-
nal time estimate of 12 months.
t
Estimate at completion (EAC), estimated to be $122,308 in this example. 
This number is calculated by taking the BAC, or $100,000 in this case, and 
dividing by the CPI, which was 81.761 percent. This EAC point is plotted on 
the chart at the estimated time to complete of 12.74 months. This number 
FIGURE 7-5 &BSOFEWBMVFDIBSUGPSQSPKFDUBGUFSGJWFNPOUIT
¥$FOHBHF-FBSOJOH
120,000
Month
80,000
60,000
40,000
20,000
-
$
Earned value (EV)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
100,000
9
10
11
Actual cost (AC)
Planned value (PV)
Budget at completion (BAC)
Estimate at completion (EAC)
12
13
An EAC
point above
and to the
right of the
BAC point
means the
project is
projected to
cost more
and take
longer than
planned
Actual cost (AC)
Planned value (PV)
Earned value (EV)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS
286
is calculated by taking the original time estimate, or 12 months in this case, 
and dividing by the SPI, which in this example was 94.203 percent.
Viewing earned value information in chart form helps you visualize how the project is 
performing. For example, you can see the planned performance by looking at the planned 
value line. If the project goes as planned, it will finish in 12 months and cost $100,000. 
Notice in the example in Figure 7-5 that the actual cost line is always on or above the 
earned value line, which indicates that costs are equal to or more than planned. The 
planned value line is close to the earned value line and is slightly higher in the last month. 
This relationship means that the project has been on schedule until the last month, when 
the project fell behind schedule.
 Top managers who oversee multiple projects often like to see performance information 
in a graphical form, such as the earned value chart in Figure 7-5. For example, in the open-
ing case, the government officials were reviewing earned value charts and EACs for several 
different projects. Earned value charts allow you to see quickly how projects are perform-
ing. If there are serious cost and schedule performance problems, top management may de-
cide to terminate projects or take other corrective action. The EACs are important inputs 
to budget decisions, especially if total funds are limited. Earned value management is an 
important technique when used effectively, because it helps top management and project 
managers evaluate progress and make sound management decisions. Consult the PMBOK® 
Guide and other resources for more information and calculations about earned value.
If earned value management is such a powerful cost control tool, then why doesn’t ev-
ery organization use it? Why do many government projects require it, but many commer-
cial projects don’t? Two reasons are EVM’s focus on tracking actual performance versus 
planned performance and the importance of percentage completion data in making cal-
culations. Many projects, particularly IT projects, do not have good planning information, 
so tracking performance against a plan might produce misleading information. Several 
cost estimates are usually made on IT projects, and keeping track of the most recent cost 
estimate and the associated actual costs could be cumbersome. In addition, estimating 
percentage completion of tasks might produce misleading information. What does it mean 
to say that a task is actually 75 percent complete after three months? Such a statement 
is often not synonymous with saying the task will be finished in one more month or after 
spending an additional 25 percent of the planned budget.
To make earned value management simpler to use, organizations can modify the level 
of detail and still reap the benefits of the technique. For example, you can use percentage 
completion data such as 0 percent for items not yet started, 50 percent for items in prog-
ress, and 100 percent for completed tasks. As long as the project is defined in enough detail, 
this simplified percentage completion data should provide enough summary information 
to allow managers to see how well a project is doing overall. You can get very accurate total 
project performance information using these simple percentage complete amounts. For ex-
ample, using simplified percentage complete amounts for a one-year project with weekly re-
porting and an average task size of one week, you can expect about a 1 percent error rate.19
You can enter and collect earned value data only at summary levels of the WBS. 
Quentin Fleming, author of the book Earned Value Project Management,20 often gives 
presentations about earned value management. Many people express their frustration in 
trying to collect such detailed information. Fleming explains that you do not have to col-
lect information at the work package level to use earned value management. It is most im-
portant to have a deliverable-oriented WBS, and many WBS items can summarize several 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
1SPKFDU$PTU.BOBHFNFOU

subdeliverables. For example, you might have a WBS for a house that includes items for 
each room in the house. Collecting earned value data for each room would provide mean-
ingful information instead of trying to collect detailed information for each component in 
the room, such as flooring, furniture, and lighting.
It is important to remember that the heart and soul of EVM are estimates. The entire 
EVM process begins with an estimate; when the estimate is off, all the calculations will be 
off. Before an organization attempts to use EVM, it must learn to develop good estimates.
Earned value management is the primary method available for integrating perfor-
mance, cost, and schedule data. It can be a powerful tool for project managers and top 
management to use in evaluating project performance. Project management software, 
such as Project 2013, includes tables for collecting earned value data and reports that 
calculate variance information. Project 2013 also allows you to easily produce an earned 
value chart, similar to the one in Figure 7-5, without importing the data into Microsoft 
Excel. See the project cost management section of Appendix A for an example of using 
earned value management.
Another approach to evaluating the performance of multiple projects is project portfo-
lio management, as described in the following section.
G L O B A L  I S S U E S
The Project Management Institute conducted a major study in 2011 to help understand 
and gauge the current level of EVM practice. The researchers surveyed more than 600 
project management practitioners in 61 countries, providing a cross-sectional view of the 
most current EVM practices. Respondents were classified by industry sector, motivation 
for EVM usage, organizational role, and geographic location. The study included the fol-
lowing key findings: 
t
EVM is used worldwide, and it is particularly popular in the Middle East, South 
Asia, Canada, and Europe.
t
Most countries require EVM for large defense or government projects, as shown in 
Figure 7-6.
t
EVM is also used in such private-industry sectors as IT, construction, energy, and 
manufacturing. However, most private companies have not yet applied EVM to their 
projects because management does not require it, feeling it is too complex and not 
cost effective.
t
The level of EVM use and maturity varies among organizations and projects, but  
budget size appears to be the most important decision factor.
t
EVM’s contributions and cost effectiveness are widely recognized; most respondents 
said they agree or strongly agree that EVM provides early warning signs, helping  
them to control project scope, time, and cost. EVM’s contribution to cost  
performance was ranked higher than schedule performance, and the difference was 
statistically significant.
t
Top barriers to enhanced use of EVM were lack of motivation and lack of expertise.
t
Top management support, buy-in of project staff, training, organizational culture 
and leadership, and maturity of the project management system were the most 
important factors in successful use of EVM.21
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS
288
7.6b Project Portfolio Management
 As you saw in Chapter 1, many organizations now collect and control an entire suite 
of projects or investments as one set of interrelated activities in one place—a portfolio. 
Several software tools provide graphics to summarize performance on a portfolio of proj-
ects, as shown in Chapter 4. Key metrics, including cost performance, are often shown in 
green, yellow, or red, indicating that things are going as planned, that problems exist, or 
that  major problems exist, respectively. Project managers need to understand how their 
projects fit into the bigger picture. For example, there can be a portfolio for IT projects 
and portfolios for other types of projects. Looking at broad categories of similar projects 
enables project managers to help their organizations make wise investment decisions.
An organization can view project portfolio management as having five levels, from 
simplest to most complex, as follows: 
 
1.  Put all your projects in one database.
 
2.  Prioritize the projects in your database.
 
3.   Divide your projects into two or three budgets based on type of investment, 
such as utilities or required systems to keep things running, incremental  
upgrades, and strategic investments.
 
4.  Automate the repository.
 
5.   Apply modern portfolio theory, including risk-return tools that map project 
risk on a curve.
FIGURE 7-6 &BSOFEWBMVFVTBHF
4PVSDF-JOHHVBOH4POHi&BSOFE7BMVF.BOBHFNFOU"(MPCBMBOE$SPTT*OEVTUSZ1FSTQFDUJWFPO
$VSSFOU&7.1SBDUJDFu1.*	

19.5
51.3
29.2
31.9
32.2
35.8
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
A few pilot
projects
Large and critical
projects
Organization-wide
standard for 
all projects
Percentage
Defense/Government
Private industry
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
289
1SPKFDU$PTU.BOBHFNFOU
Many project managers also want to move on to manage larger projects, become pro-
gram managers, then vice presidents, and eventually CEOs. Understanding project portfo-
lio management, therefore is important for both project and organizational success.
Jane Walton, the project portfolio manager for IT projects at Schlumberger, saved 
the company $3 million in one year by organizing the organization’s 120 IT projects into 
a portfolio. Manufacturing companies have used project portfolio management since the 
1960s, and Walton anticipated the need to justify investments in IT projects just as man-
agers have to justify capital investment projects. She found that 80 percent of the organi-
zation’s projects overlapped, and that 14 separate projects were trying to accomplish the 
same thing. Other managers, such as Douglas Hubbard, president of a consulting firm, see 
the need to use project portfolio management, especially for IT projects. Hubbard sug-
gests, “IT investments are huge, risky investments. It’s time we do this.”22
Project portfolio managers can start by using spreadsheet software to develop and 
manage project portfolios, or they can use sophisticated software designed to help manage 
project portfolios. Several software tools available today help project portfolio managers 
summarize earned value and project portfolio information, as described in the following 
section.
7.7 USING PROJECT MANAGEMENT SOFTWARE TO ASSIST  
IN  PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT
Most organizations use software to assist with project cost management. Spreadsheets 
are a common tool for cost estimating, cost budgeting, and cost control. Many companies 
also use more sophisticated and centralized financial software to provide important cost-
related information to accounting and finance personnel. This section focuses on how you 
can use project management software in cost management. Appendix A includes a section 
on using the cost management features in Project 2013.
Project management software can increase a project manager’s effectiveness during 
each process of project cost management. It can help you study overall project informa-
tion or identify and focus on tasks that are over a specified cost limit. You can use the soft-
ware to assign costs to resources and tasks, prepare cost estimates, develop cost budgets, 
and monitor cost performance. Project 2013 has several standard cost reports: cash flow, 
budget, over-budget tasks, over-budget resources, and earned value reports. For several of 
these reports, you must enter percentage completion information and actual costs, just as 
you do when manually calculating earned value or other analyses.
Many IT project managers use other tools to manage cost information because they do 
not know that they can use project management software, or they do not track costs based 
on a WBS, as most project management software does. Instead of using dedicated project 
management software for cost management, some IT project managers use company ac-
counting systems; others use spreadsheet software to achieve more flexibility. Project 
managers who use other software often do so because these other systems are more gener-
ally accepted in their organizations and more people know how to use them. To improve 
project cost management, several companies have developed methods to link data be-
tween their project management software and their main accounting software. Regardless, 
users need training to use dedicated project management software and understand the 
available features.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS

Many organizations are using software to organize and analyze all types of project 
data into project portfolios and across the entire enterprise. Enterprise or project port-
folio management (PPM) tools integrate information from multiple projects to show the 
projects’ status and health. In 2012, over half of the respondents in two different studies 
(PMI’s PMI Pulse of the Profession™ and a PricewaterhouseCoopers survey) reported  
frequent use of PPM. The highest adoption rates were reported by organizations in retail, 
insurance, auto, banking and capital markets, telecommunications, manufacturing,  
energy, and defense. The main reasons organizations use project portfolio management  
included customer satisfaction, cost reduction, and revenue growth.23
More recently, a 2014 report from Gartner says the market for PPM software contin-
ues to grow, with annual sales over $1.65 billion. “Demand for IT PPM applications has not 
wavered in more than 13 years, but, rather, increased exponentially over the past  
10 years. The pace of change... is driving continued demand for enterprise software prod-
ucts that can help with the effective planning, execution, and management of projects and 
programs materializing from the need for today’s enterprises to change and adapt quickly 
to shifts in the business climate.”24
A study by Forrester estimates that companies are achieving returns of 250 percent 
from their investments in PPM tools. At a Planisware PPM Solutions Summit in 2014, cus-
tomers shared examples of their success stories in achieving even higher returns: 
t
Pfizer uses PPM software to accelerate innovation and improve transparency and 
accountability of resources to deliver scientific excellence. Pfizer can quickly ac-
cess trusted data analytics to make strategic resource allocations that maximize 
portfolio value.
t
Ford uses Planisware to gain greater transparency over their portfolio of  
projects. Greater transparency gives management a better understanding of  
resources shared across projects, and enhances communication about statuses. 
They can quickly alert affected program managers and product development 
teams of potential risks so they can implement risk management strategies.25
As with using any software, however, managers must make sure that the data is accu-
rate and up to date, and ask pertinent questions before making any major decisions.
C A S E  W R A P - U P
After talking to his colleagues about the meeting, Juan had a better idea about the  
importance of project cost management. He understood the value of doing detailed  
studies before making major expenditures on new projects, especially after learning 
about the high cost of correcting defects late in a project. He also learned the importance 
of developing good cost estimates and keeping costs on track. He enjoyed seeing how the 
cost estimate was developed for the Surveyor Pro project, and was eager to learn more 
about various estimating tools and techniques.
At the meeting, government officials cancelled several projects when the project 
managers showed how poorly the projects were performing and admitted that they did 
not do much planning and analysis early in the projects. Juan knew that he could not fo-
cus on just the technical aspects of projects if he wanted to move ahead in his career. He 
began to wonder whether several projects the city was considering were really worth the 
taxpayers’ money. Issues of cost management added a new dimension to Juan’s job.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
1SPKFDU$PTU.BOBHFNFOU

Chapter Summary
1SPKFDUDPTUNBOBHFNFOUJTUSBEJUJPOBMMZBXFBLBSFBPG*5QSPKFDUT*5QSPKFDUNBOBHFSTNVTUBD
LOPXMFEHFUIFJNQPSUBODFPGDPTUNBOBHFNFOUBOEUBLFSFTQPOTJCJMJUZGPSVOEFSTUBOEJOHCBTJD
DPTUDPODFQUTDPTUFTUJNBUJOHCVEHFUJOHBOEDPTUDPOUSPM
1SPKFDUNBOBHFSTNVTUVOEFSTUBOETFWFSBMCBTJDQSJODJQMFTPGDPTUNBOBHFNFOUUPCFFG
GFDUJWFJONBOBHJOHQSPKFDUDPTUT*NQPSUBOUDPODFQUTJODMVEFQSPGJUTBOEQSPGJUNBSHJOTMJGFDZDMF
DPTUJOHDBTIGMPXBOBMZTJTTVOLDPTUTBOEMFBSOJOHDVSWFUIFPSZ
1MBOOJOHDPTUNBOBHFNFOUJOWPMWFTEFUFSNJOJOHUIFQPMJDJFTQSPDFEVSFTBOEEPDVNFOUB
UJPOUIBUXJMMCFVTFEGPSQMBOOJOHFYFDVUJOHBOEDPOUSPMMJOHQSPKFDUDPTU5IFNBJOPVUQVUPGUIJT
QSPDFTTJTBDPTUNBOBHFNFOUQMBO
&TUJNBUJOHDPTUTJTBWFSZJNQPSUBOUQBSUPGQSPKFDUDPTUNBOBHFNFOU5IFSFBSFTFWFSBM
UZQFTPGDPTUFTUJNBUFTJODMVEJOHSPVHIPSEFSPGNBHOJUVEF	30.
CVEHFUBSZBOEEFGJOJUJWF
&BDIUZQFPGFTUJNBUFJTEPOFEVSJOHEJGGFSFOUTUBHFTPGUIFQSPKFDUMJGFDZDMFBOEFBDIIBTB
EJGGFSFOUMFWFMPGBDDVSBDZ4FWFSBMUPPMTBOEUFDIOJRVFTDBOIFMQZPVEFWFMPQDPTUFTUJNBUFT
JODMVEJOHBOBMPHPVTFTUJNBUJOHCPUUPNVQFTUJNBUJOHQBSBNFUSJDFTUJNBUJOHBOEDPNQVUFSJ[FE
UPPMT'VODUJPOQPJOUBOBMZTJTDBOBMTPCFVTFEUPFTUJNBUFTPGUXBSFEFWFMPQNFOUDPTUT
%FUFSNJOJOHUIFCVEHFUJOWPMWFTBMMPDBUJOHDPTUTUPJOEJWJEVBMXPSLJUFNTPWFSUJNF*UJT
JNQPSUBOUUPVOEFSTUBOEIPXQBSUJDVMBSPSHBOJ[BUJPOTQSFQBSFCVEHFUTTPFTUJNBUFTBSFNBEF
BDDPSEJOHMZ
$POUSPMMJOHDPTUTJODMVEFTNPOJUPSJOHDPTUQFSGPSNBODFSFWJFXJOHDIBOHFTBOEOPUJGZJOH
QSPKFDUTUBLFIPMEFSTPGDIBOHFTSFMBUFEUPDPTUT.BOZCBTJDBDDPVOUJOHBOEGJOBODFQSJODJQMFT
SFMBUFUPQSPKFDUDPTUNBOBHFNFOU&BSOFEWBMVFNBOBHFNFOUJTBOJNQPSUBOUNFUIPEVTFEGPS
NFBTVSJOHQSPKFDUQFSGPSNBODF&BSOFEWBMVFNBOBHFNFOUJOUFHSBUFTTDPQFDPTUBOETDIFE
VMFJOGPSNBUJPO1SPKFDUQPSUGPMJPNBOBHFNFOUBMMPXTPSHBOJ[BUJPOTUPDPMMFDUBOEDPOUSPMBO
FOUJSFTVJUFPGQSPKFDUTPSJOWFTUNFOUTBTPOFTFUPGJOUFSSFMBUFEBDUJWJUJFT
4FWFSBMTPGUXBSFQSPEVDUTDBOBTTJTUXJUIQSPKFDUDPTUNBOBHFNFOU1SPKFDUIBTNBOZ
DPTUNBOBHFNFOUGFBUVSFTJODMVEJOHFBSOFEWBMVFNBOBHFNFOU&OUFSQSJTFQSPKFDUNBOBHFNFOU
TPGUXBSFBOEQPSUGPMJPNBOBHFNFOUTPGUXBSFDBOIFMQNBOBHFSTFWBMVBUFEBUBPONVMUJQMFQSPKFDUT
Quick Quiz
 "DDPVOUBOUTVTVBMMZEFGJOF@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@BTBSFTPVSDFTBDSJGJDFEPS
GPSFHPOFUPBDIJFWFBTQFDJGJDPCKFDUJWF
B
NPOFZ
C
MJBCJMJUZ
D
USBEF
E
DPTU
 8IBUJTUIFNBJOHPBMPGQSPKFDUDPTUNBOBHFNFOU 
B
UPDPNQMFUFBQSPKFDUGPSBTMJUUMFDPTUBTQPTTJCMF
C
UPDPNQMFUFBQSPKFDUXJUIJOBOBQQSPWFECVEHFU
D
UPQSPWJEFUSVUIGVMBOEBDDVSBUFDPTUJOGPSNBUJPOPOQSPKFDUT
E
UPFOTVSFUIBUBOPSHBOJ[BUJPOTNPOFZJTVTFEXJTFMZ
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS
292
 8IJDIPGUIFGPMMPXJOHJTOPUBOPVUQVUPGUIFQSPKFDUDPTUNBOBHFNFOUQSPDFTTDBMMFE
FTUJNBUJOHDPTUTBDDPSEJOHUPUIFPMBOK® Guide?
B
BDUJWJUZDPTUFTUJNBUFT
C
BDPTUCBTFMJOF
D
CBTJTPGFTUJNBUFT
E
QSPKFDUEPDVNFOUTVQEBUFT
 *GBDPNQBOZMPTFTGPSFWFSZJOSFWFOVFGPSBDFSUBJOQSPEVDUXIBUJTUIFQSPGJU
NBSHJOGPSUIBUQSPEVDU 
B
-QFSDFOU
C
QFSDFOU
D
-
E

 @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@SFTFSWFTBMMPXGPSGVUVSFTJUVBUJPOTUIBUBSFVOQSFEJDUBCMF
B
$POUJOHFODZ
C
'JOBODJBM
D
.BOBHFNFOU
E
#BTFMJOF
 :PVBSFQSFQBSJOHBDPTUFTUJNBUFGPSBCVJMEJOHCBTFEPOJUTMPDBUJPOQVSQPTFOVNCFSPG
TRVBSFGFFUBOEPUIFSDIBSBDUFSJTUJDT8IBUDPTUFTUJNBUJOHUFDIOJRVFBSFZPVVTJOH 
B
QBSBNFUSJD
C
BOBMPHPVT
D
CPUUPNVQ
E
UPQEPXO
 @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@JOWPMWFTBMMPDBUJOHUIFQSPKFDUDPTUFTUJNBUFUPJOEJWJEVBM
NBUFSJBMSFTPVSDFTPSXPSLJUFNTPWFSUJNF
B
3FTFSWFBOBMZTJT
C
-JGFDZDMFDPTUJOH
D
1SPKFDUDPTUCVEHFUJOH
E
&BSOFEWBMVFBOBMZTJT
 @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@JTBQSPKFDUQFSGPSNBODFNFBTVSFNFOUUFDIOJRVFUIBU
JOUFHSBUFTTDPQFUJNFBOEDPTUEBUB
B
3FTFSWFBOBMZTJT
C
-JGFDZDMFDPTUJOH
D
1SPKFDUDPTUCVEHFUJOH
E
&BSOFEWBMVFNBOBHFNFOU
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
1SPKFDU$PTU.BOBHFNFOU

 *GUIFBDUVBMDPTUGPSB8#4JUFNJTBOEJUTFBSOFEWBMVFJTXIBUJTJUTDPTU
WBSJBODFBOEJTJUVOEFSPSPWFSCVEHFU 
B
5IFDPTUWBSJBODFJT¢XIJDIJTPWFSCVEHFU
C
5IFDPTUWBSJBODFJT¢XIJDIJTVOEFSCVEHFU
D
5IFDPTUWBSJBODFJTXIJDIJTPWFSCVEHFU
E
5IFDPTUWBSJBODFJTXIJDIJTVOEFSCVEHFU
 *GBQSPKFDUJTIBMGXBZDPNQMFUFEJUTTDIFEVMFQFSGPSNBODFJOEFYJTQFSDFOUBOEJUTDPTU
QFSGPSNBODFJOEFYJTQFSDFOUIPXJTJUQSPHSFTTJOH 
B
*UJTBIFBEPGTDIFEVMFBOEVOEFSCVEHFU
C
*UJTBIFBEPGTDIFEVMFBOEPWFSCVEHFU
D
*UJTCFIJOETDIFEVMFBOEVOEFSCVEHFU
E
*UJTCFIJOETDIFEVMFBOEPWFSCVEHFU
Quick Quiz Answers
ECCBDBDEEC
Discussion Questions
 %JTDVTTXIZNBOZ*5QSPGFTTJPOBMTNBZPWFSMPPLQSPKFDUDPTUNBOBHFNFOUBOEIPXUIJT
NJHIUBGGFDUUIFBCJMJUZUPDPNQMFUFQSPKFDUTXJUIJOCVEHFU
 &YQMBJOTPNFPGUIFCBTJDQSJODJQMFTPGDPTUNBOBHFNFOUTVDIBTQSPGJUTMJGFDZDMFDPTUT
UBOHJCMFBOEJOUBOHJCMFDPTUTBOECFOFGJUTEJSFDUBOEJOEJSFDUDPTUTBOESFTFSWFT
 8IBUJTNFBOUCZBTVOLDPTU (JWFFYBNQMFTPGUZQJDBMTVOLDPTUTGPSBO*5QSPKFDUBTXFMM
BTFYBNQMFTGSPNZPVSQFSTPOBMMJGF8IZJTJUEJGGJDVMUGPSQFPQMFUPJHOPSFUIFNXIFOUIFZ
TIPVME 
 (JWFFYBNQMFTPGXIFOZPVXPVMEQSFQBSFSPVHIPSEFSPGNBHOJUVEF	30.
CVEHFUBSZBOE
EFGJOJUJWFDPTUFTUJNBUFTGPSBO*5QSPKFDU(JWFBOFYBNQMFPGIPXZPVXPVMEVTFFBDIPGUIF
GPMMPXJOHUFDIOJRVFTGPSDSFBUJOHBDPTUFTUJNBUFBOBMPHPVTQBSBNFUSJDBOECPUUPNVQ
 &YQMBJOXIBUIBQQFOTEVSJOHUIFQSPDFTTUPEFUFSNJOFUIFQSPKFDUCVEHFU
 &YQMBJOIPXFBSOFEWBMVFNBOBHFNFOU	&7.
DBOCFVTFEUPDPOUSPMDPTUTBOENFBTVSF
QSPKFDUQFSGPSNBODFBOEFYQMBJOXIZZPVUIJOLJUJTOPUVTFENPSFPGUFO8IBUBSFTPNF
HFOFSBMSVMFTPGUIVNCGPSEFDJEJOHJGOVNCFSTGPSDPTUWBSJBODFTDIFEVMFWBSJBODFDPTUQFS
GPSNBODFJOEFYBOETDIFEVMFQFSGPSNBODFJOEFYBSFHPPEPSCBE 

8IBUJTQSPKFDUQPSUGPMJPNBOBHFNFOU $BOQSPKFDUNBOBHFSTVTFJUXJUIFBSOFEWBMVF
NBOBHFNFOU 
 %FTDSJCFTFWFSBMUZQFTPGTPGUXBSFUIBUQSPKFDUNBOBHFSTDBOVTFUPTVQQPSUQSPKFDUDPTU
NBOBHFNFOU
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS
294
Exercises
 (JWFOUIFGPMMPXJOHJOGPSNBUJPOGPSBPOFZFBSQSPKFDUBOTXFSUIFGPMMPXJOHRVFTUJPOT3FDBMM
UIBU17JTUIFQMBOOFEWBMVF&7JTUIFFBSOFEWBMVF"$JTUIFBDUVBMDPTUBOE#"$JTUIF
CVEHFUBUDPNQMFUJPO
17=
&7=
"$=
#"$=
B  8IBUJTUIFDPTUWBSJBODFTDIFEVMFWBSJBODFDPTUQFSGPSNBODFJOEFY	$1*
BOE
TDIFEVMFQFSGPSNBODFJOEFY	41*
GPSUIFQSPKFDU 
C  )PXJTUIFQSPKFDUEPJOH *TJUBIFBEPGTDIFEVMFPSCFIJOETDIFEVMF *TJUVOEFS
CVEHFUPSPWFSCVEHFU 
D  6TFUIF$1*UPDBMDVMBUFUIFFTUJNBUFBUDPNQMFUJPO	&"$
GPSUIJTQSPKFDU*TUIFQSPKFDU
QFSGPSNJOHCFUUFSPSXPSTFUIBOQMBOOFE 
E  6TFUIF41*UPFTUJNBUFIPXMPOHJUXJMMUBLFUPGJOJTIUIJTQSPKFDU
F  4LFUDIUIFFBSOFEWBMVFDIBSUGPSUIJTQSPKFDUVTJOH'JHVSFBTBHVJEF
 $SFBUFBDPTUFTUJNBUFBOENPEFMGPSCVJMEJOHBOFXTUBUFPGUIFBSUNVMUJNFEJBDMBTTSPPN
GPSZPVSPSHBOJ[BUJPOXJUIJOUIFOFYUTJYNPOUIT5IFDMBTTSPPNTIPVMEJODMVEFIJHIFOE
QFSTPOBMDPNQVUFSTXJUIBQQSPQSJBUFTPGUXBSFGPSZPVSPSHBOJ[BUJPOBOFUXPSLTFSWFS*OUFS
OFUBDDFTTGPSBMMNBDIJOFTBOJOTUSVDUPSTUBUJPOBOEBQSPKFDUJPOTZTUFN#FTVSFUPJODMVEF
QFSTPOOFMDPTUTBTTPDJBUFEXJUIUIFQSPKFDUNBOBHFNFOUGPSUIJTQSPKFDU%PDVNFOUUIF
BTTVNQUJPOTZPVNBEFJOQSFQBSJOHUIFFTUJNBUFBOEQSPWJEFFYQMBOBUJPOTGPSLFZOVNCFST
 3FTFBSDIVTJOHUIFDPTUNBOBHFNFOUGFBUVSFTPG1SPKFDUPSPUIFSTPGUXBSFUPPMTJO
DMVEJOHQSPKFDUQPSUGPMJPNBOBHFNFOUTPGUXBSF"MTPSFWJFXUIFQSPKFDUDPTUNBOBHFNFOU
TFDUJPOPG"QQFOEJY""TLUISFFQFPQMFJOEJGGFSFOU*5PSHBOJ[BUJPOTUIBUVTFQSPKFDUNBOBHF
NFOUTPGUXBSFJGUIFZVTFUIFDPTUNBOBHFNFOUGFBUVSFTPGUIFTPGUXBSFBOEJOXIBUXBZT
8SJUFBCSJFGSFQPSUPOXIBUZPVMFBSOFEGSPNZPVSSFTFBSDI
 3FBEUIFGSFFFCPPLCost Estimating in an Agile Development EnvironmentCZ"MWJO
"MFYBOEFSXIJDIEJTDVTTFTFTUJNBUJOHTPGUXBSFDPTUT'JOEPOFPSUXPPUIFSSFGFSFODFTPO
XBZTUPNFBTVSFTPGUXBSFEFWFMPQNFOUDPTUT*OZPVSPXOXPSETXSJUFBUXPQBHFQBQFS
UIBUFYQMBJOTIPXUPFTUJNBUFTPGUXBSFEFWFMPQNFOUDPTUTVTJOHBUMFBTUUXPEJGGFSFOU
BQQSPBDIFT
 $SFBUFBTQSFBETIFFUUPDBMDVMBUFZPVSQSPKFDUFEUPUBMDPTUTUPUBMSFWFOVFTBOEUPUBMQSPGJUT
GPSHJWJOHBTFNJOBSPODPTUFTUJNBUJOH.BLFUIFGPMMPXJOHBTTVNQUJPOT
t
:PVXJMMDIBSHFQFSQFSTPOGPSBUXPEBZDMBTT
r
:PVFTUJNBUFUIBUQFPQMFXJMMBUUFOEUIFDMBTTCVUZPVXBOUUPDIBOHFUIJTJOQVU
r
:PVSGJYFEDPTUTJODMVEFUPUBMUPSFOUBSPPNGPSCPUIEBZTTFUVQGFFTPGGPS
SFHJTUSBUJPOBOEGPSEFTJHOJOHBQPTUDBSEGPSBEWFSUJTJOH
r
:PVXJMMOPUJODMVEFZPVSMBCPSDPTUTGPSUIJTFTUJNBUFCVUZPVFTUJNBUFUIBUZPVXJMMTQFOEBU
MFBTUIPVSTEFWFMPQJOHNBUFSJBMTNBOBHJOHUIFQSPKFDUBOEHJWJOHUIFBDUVBMDMBTT:PV
XPVMEMJLFUPLOPXXIBUZPVSUJNFJTXPSUIHJWFOEJGGFSFOUTDFOBSJPT
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.