C H A P T E R5
PROJECT SCOPE
MANAGEMENT
L E A R N I N G O B J E C T I V E S
After reading this chapter, you will be able to:
r

r
%
r
%

r
&
QSPKFDUTDPQFTUBUFNFOU
r
%
BOBMPHZ
UPQEPXO
CPUUPNVQ
BOENJOENBQQJOHBQQSPBDIFT
r
&
BOEDPOUSPMMJOHTDPQF
r

*5
QSPKFDUT
r
%
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

$IBQUFS
184
O P E N I N G C A S E
Kim Nguyen was leading a meeting to create the work breakdown structure (WBS) for her
company's IT upgrade project. This project was necessary because of several high-priority,
Internet-based applications the company was developing. The IT upgrade project involved
creating and implementing a plan to make all employees' IT assets meet new corporate
standards within nine months. These standards specified the minimum requirements for
each desktop or laptop computer, including the type of processor, amount of memory, hard
disk size, type of network connection, security features, and software. Kim knew that to
perform the upgrades, the project team would first have to create a detailed inventory of all
the current hardware, networks, and software in the entire company of 2,000 employees.
Kim had worked with other stakeholders to develop a project charter and initial
scope statement. The project charter included rough cost and schedule estimates for the
project and signatures of key stakeholders; the initial scope statement provided a start in
defining the hardware, software, and network requirements as well as other information
related to the project scope. Kim called a meeting with her project team and other stake-
holders to further define the scope of the project. She wanted to get everyone's ideas on
what the project involved, who would do what, and how they could avoid scope creep.
The company's new CEO, Walter Schmidt, was known for keeping a close eye on major
projects. The company had started using a new project management information system
that let everyone know the status of projects at a detailed and high level. Kim knew that
a good WBS was the foundation for scope, time, and cost performance, but she had never
led a team in creating one or allocating costs based on a WBS. Where should she begin?
5.1 WHAT IS PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT?
Many of the factors associated with project success, such as user involvement, clear busi-
ness objectives, and optimized scope, are elements of project scope management.
A critically important and difficult aspect of project management is defining the scope
of a project. Scope refers to all the work involved in creating the products of the proj-
ect and the processes used to create them. Recall from Chapter 2 that a deliverable is a
product created as part of a project. Deliverables can be product-related, such as a piece
of hardware or software, or process-related, such as a planning document or meeting min-
utes. Project stakeholders must agree what the products of the project are and, to some
extent, how they should be produced to define all of the deliverables.
Project scope management includes the processes involved in defining and control-
ling what work is or is not included in a project. It ensures that the project team and
stakeholders have the same understanding of what products the project will produce and
what processes the project team will use to produce them. Six main processes are involved
in project scope management:
1. Planning scope management involves determining how the project's scope and
requirements will be managed. The project team works with appropriate stake-
holders to create a scope management plan and requirements management plan.
2. Collecting requirements involves defining and documenting the features and
functions of the products as well as the processes used for creating them. The
project team creates requirements documentation and a requirements
traceability matrix as outputs of the requirements collection process.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
1SPKFDU4DPQF.BOBHFNFOU

3. Defining scope involves reviewing the scope management plan, project char-
ter, requirements documents, and organizational process assets to create a
scope statement, adding more information as requirements are developed
and change requests are approved. Outputs of scope definition are the project
scope statement and updates to project documents.
4. Creating the WBS involves subdividing the major project deliverables into
smaller, more manageable components. Outputs include a scope baseline (which
includes a WBS and a WBS dictionary) and updates to project documents.
5. Validating scope involves formalizing acceptance of the project deliverables.
Key project stakeholders, such as the customer and sponsor for the project,
inspect and then formally accept the deliverables during this process. If the
deliverables are not acceptable, the customer or sponsor usually requests
changes. The outputs of this process are accepted deliverables, change re-
quests, work performance information, and updates to project documents.
6. Controlling scope involves controlling changes to project scope throughout the
life of the project-a challenge on many IT projects. Scope changes often influ-
ence the team's ability to meet project time and cost goals, so project managers
must carefully weigh the costs and benefits of scope changes. The outputs of this
process are work performance information, change requests, and updates to the
project management plan, project documents, and organizational process assets.
Figure 5-1 summarizes these processes and outputs and shows when they occur in a
typical project.
Planning
Process: Plan scope management
Outputs: Scope management plan, requirements management plan
Process: Collect requirements
Outputs: Requirements documentation, requirements traceability matrix
Process: Deﬁne scope
Outputs: Project scope statement, project documents updates
Process: Create WBS
Outputs: Scope baseline, project documents updates
Monitoring and Controlling
Process: Validate scope
Outputs: Accepted deliverables, change requests, work performance
information, project documents updates
Process: Control scope
Outputs: Work performance information, change requests, project
management plan updates, project documents updates,
organizational process assets updates
Project Start
Project Finish
FIGURE 5-1
¥$FOHBHF-FBSOJOH
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS

5.2 PLANNING SCOPE MANAGEMENT
The first step in project scope management is planning how the scope will be managed
throughout the life of the project. After reviewing the project management plan, project
charter, enterprise environmental factors, and organizational process assets, the project
team uses expert judgment and meetings to develop two important outputs: the scope
management plan and the requirements management plan.
The scope management plan is a subsidiary part of the project management plan, as
described in Chapter 4, Project Integration Management. It can be informal and broad or
formal and detailed, based on the needs of the project. In fact, small projects may not need a
written scope management plan, but large projects or highly technical projects often benefit
from one. In general, a scope management plan includes the following information:
t
How to prepare a detailed project scope statement: For example, are there
templates or guidelines to follow? How much detail is needed to describe each
deliverable?
t
How to create a WBS: It is often difficult to create a good WBS. This section
of the scope management plan would provide suggestions, samples, and
resources for creating a WBS.
t
How to maintain and approve the WBS: The initial WBS often changes,
and project team members disagree on what should be included. The scope
management plan describes guidelines for maintaining the WBS and getting
approval for it.
t
How to obtain formal acceptance of the completed project deliverables: It is
extremely important to understand the process for obtaining formal accep-
tance of completed deliverables, especially for projects in which payments
are based on formal acceptance.
t
How to control requests for changes to the project scope: This process is
related to performing integrated change control, as described in Chapter 4.
Organizations often have guidelines for submitting, evaluating, and approv-
ing changes to scope, and this section of the scope management plan would
specify how to handle change requests for the project.
Another important output of planning scope management is the requirements
management plan. Before you learn about the contents of this document, it is important to
understand what requirements are. The 1990 IEEE Standard Glossary of Software
Engineering Terminology defines a requirement as follows:

"1. A condition or capability needed by a user to solve a problem or achieve an
objective.

2. A condition or capability that must be met or possessed by a
system or system component to satisfy a contract, standard, specification, or
other formally imposed document.

3. A documented representation of a condition or capability as in 1 or 2."1
The PMBOK Guide, Fifth Edition, describes requirements as "conditions or capabili-
ties that must be met by the project or present in the product, service, or result to satisfy
an agreement or other formally imposed specification." It further explains that require-
ments "include the quantified and documented needs and expectations of the sponsor,
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
1SPKFDU4DPQF.BOBHFNFOU
187
customer, and other stakeholders. These requirements need to be elicited, analyzed, and
recorded in enough detail to be included in the scope baseline and be measured once proj-
ect execution begins."
For example, the chapter's opening case describes a project for upgrading IT assets to
meet corporate standards. These standards specify the minimum requirements for each
laptop, such as the type of processor, amount of memory, and hard disk size. The docu-
mented requirements for this project, therefore, might state that all laptops include an
Intel processor, at least 16 GB of memory, and a 2-TB hard drive.
For some IT projects, it is helpful to divide requirements development into categories
called elicitation, analysis, specification, and validation. These categories include all the
activities involved in gathering, evaluating, and documenting requirements for a software
or software-containing product. It is also important to use an iterative approach to defin-
ing requirements because they are often unclear early in a project.
The requirements management plan documents how project requirements will be
analyzed, documented, and managed. A requirements management plan can include the
following information:
t
How to plan, track, and report requirements activities
t
How to perform configuration management activities
t
How to prioritize requirements
t
How to use product metrics
t
How to trace and capture attributes of requirements
W H A T W E N T R I G H T ?
Several studies cite how difficult it is to manage requirements. Finding qualified people-
business analysts-to do the job is equally difficult. The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics has
projected the number of jobs for business analysts to increase 19 percent by 2022.2 A 2014 PMI
survey found that only 49 percent of respondents had the resources in place to do requirements
management properly and 53 percent failed to use a formal process to validate requirements.3
Fortunately, several organizations have recognized this need and have developed
training and certification programs for business analysts.
t
The International Institute of Business Analysis (IIBA) issues both the Certified
Business Analysis Professional (CBAP) and Certification of Competency in
Business Analysis (CCBA) certifications. This organization had about 28,000
members by the end of 2014 and recently published the third edition of the Guide
to Business Analysis Body of Knowledge (BABOK Guide).
t
The International Requirements Engineering Board (IREB) provides certifica-
tion as a Certified Professional for Requirements Engineering (CPRE). Over
19,000 people in 55 countries held this certification by the end of 2014.
t
PMI began offering a new certification as a PMI Professional in Business Analysis
(PMI-PBA) in 2014.
t
Several colleges and universities are offering majors and minors in business or
data analytics at the undergraduate and graduate levels.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS
188
5.3 COLLECTING REQUIREMENTS
The second step in project scope management is often the most difficult: collecting
requirements. A major consequence of not defining requirements well is rework, which
can consume up to half of project costs, especially for software development projects. As
illustrated in Figure 5-2, it costs much more (up to 30 times more) to correct a software
defect in later development phases than to fix it in the requirements phase. Everyone
can cite examples in all types of industries of how important it is to understand require-
ments as early as possible. For example, if you are designing a house, it is much cheaper
to decide where windows and walls will be on paper or a computer screen than after the
entire house is framed. New processes and technologies are making it easier to define and
implement requirements, but it is still one of the most challenging aspects of project scope
management.
FIGURE 5-2
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Design and
architecture
Implementation
Development Phase
Integration
testing
Customer
beta test
Postproduct
release
Relative Cost
100
500
1000
1500
3000
Source: IBM Software Group, "Minimizing code defects to improve software quality and lower development
costs," Rational Software (October 2008).
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
1SPKFDU4DPQF.BOBHFNFOU
189
B E S T P R A C T I C E
Google continues to be among the most admired companies in the world, well-known for
being a great place to work and for being innovative in developing new products. James
Whittaker, former engineering director at Google, responsible for testing Chrome, maps,
and Google web apps, wrote a book with co-authors Jason Arbon and Jeff Carollo (also
former Google employees) called How Google Tests Software. Whittaker also worked for
Microsoft and as a professor and is one of the best-known names in testing software.
In How Google Tests Software, the authors explain that Google used to be like other
large companies: testing was not part of the mainstream, and people who did it were
underappreciated and overworked. It took Google a long time to develop the people, pro-
cesses, and technologies it uses today to develop software. A key part of success at Google
was changing the culture. Google has fewer dedicated testers than most of its competitors
have on a single product team. How is that possible? The authors explain that quality
rests on the shoulders of those writing the code. The employees at Google do things the
best, fastest way possible for them, knowing that coders are responsible for the quality of
their own work. They don't rely on testers to ensure quality.
It is also interesting to note that Google does not believe in fads or buzzwords. In an
interview, InfoQ asked the authors how Google's approach fits into the wider Agile com-
munity. Their response: "Google doesn't try to be part of the Agile community. We don't
use the terminology of scrums or bother with scrum masters and the like. We have crafted
our own process of moving fast. It's a very Agile process that doesn't get bogged down with
someone else's idea of what it means to be Agile. When you have to stop and define what
it means to be Agile and argue what flavor of Agile you are, you just stopped being Agile."4
Part of the difficulty is that people often do not have a good process for collecting and
documenting project requirements.
There are several ways to collect requirements. Interviewing stakeholders one on one is
often very effective, although it can be expensive and time-consuming. Holding focus groups
and facilitated workshops, and using group creativity and decision-making techniques to
collect requirements, are normally faster and less expensive than one-on-one interviews.
Questionnaires and surveys can be efficient ways to collect requirements as long as key
stakeholders provide honest and thorough information. Observation can also be a good
technique for collecting requirements, especially for projects that involve improving work
processes and procedures. For software development projects, prototyping and document
analysis are common techniques for collecting requirements, as are context diagrams, which
help to clarify the interfaces and boundaries of a project or process. On agile software devel-
opment projects, the product owner creates the prioritized product backlog for each sprint,
as shown in Chapter 3. Benchmarking, or generating ideas by comparing specific project
practices or product characteristics to those of other projects or products inside or outside
the performing organization, can also be used to collect requirements.
Even though there are many ways to collect requirements, people who work on soft-
ware projects in particular have considerable difficulty defining and managing require-
ments. A 2011 study revealed some interesting statistics:
t
Eighty-eight percent of the software projects involved enhancing existing
products instead of creating new ones.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS

t
Eighty-six percent of respondents said that customer satisfaction was
the most important metric for measuring the success of development
projects, 82 percent said that feedback from customers and partners was
the main source of product ideas and requirements, and 73 percent said the
most important challenge for their teams was gaining a clear understand-
ing of what customers wanted, followed by documenting and managing
requirements.
t
Seventy-five percent of respondents were managing projects with at least
100 requirements; 20 percent were managing projects with over 1,000
requirements.
t
Seventy percent of respondents spent at least 10 percent of their time man-
aging changes to requirements; 30 percent spent more than 25 percent of
their time on such changes.
t
The majority of software development teams used a hybrid methodology,
26 percent used waterfall or modified waterfall techniques, and 19 percent
used agile techniques.
t
Eighty-three percent of software development teams still use Microsoft
Office applications such as Word and Excel as their main tools to
communicate requirements.
t
The respondents listed "requirements collaboration and management
software" and "requirements modeling and visualization" as the top two
software tools on their wish list, followed by test management and project
management.5
The project's size, complexity, importance, and other factors affect how much effort
is spent on collecting requirements. For example, a team working on a project to upgrade
the entire corporate accounting system for a multibillion-dollar company with more than
50 locations should spend a fair amount of time collecting requirements. On the other
hand, a project to upgrade the hardware and software for a small accounting firm with
only five employees would need a much smaller effort. In any case, it is important for a
project team to decide how it will collect and manage requirements. It is crucial to gather
inputs from key stakeholders and align the scope with business strategy, as described in
Chapter 4.
Just as a project team can collect requirements in several ways, there are several
ways to document the requirements. Project teams should first review the project char-
ter because it includes high-level requirements for the project, and they should refer to
the scope and requirements management plans. They should also review the stakeholder
register and stakeholder management plan to ensure that all key stakeholders have a say
in determining requirements. The format for documenting stakeholder requirements can
range from a listing of all requirements on a single piece of paper to a room full of note-
books. People who have worked on complex projects, such as building a new airplane,
know that the requirements documentation for a plane can weigh more than the plane
itself! Requirements documents are often generated by software and include text, images,
diagrams, videos, and other media. Requirements are often broken down into different
categories such as functional requirements, service requirements, performance require-
ments, quality requirements, and training requirements.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
1SPKFDU4DPQF.BOBHFNFOU
191
In addition to preparing requirements documentation as an output of collecting
requirements, project teams often create a requirements traceability matrix. A require-
ments traceability matrix (RTM) is a table that lists requirements, their various at-
tributes, and the status of the requirements to ensure that all are addressed. Table 5-1
provides an example of an RTM entry for the IT upgrade project described in the chapter's
opening case. An RTM can have many variations. For example, software requirements are
often documented in an RTM that cross-references each requirement with related ones
and lists specific tests to verify that they are met. Remember that the main purpose of an
RTM is to maintain the linkage from the source of each requirement through its decompo-
sition to implementation and validation. Search the Internet for more detailed examples
of an RTM.
5.4 DEFINING SCOPE
The next step in project scope management is to provide a detailed definition of the work
required for the project. Good scope definition is very important to project success
because it helps improve the accuracy of time, cost, and resource estimates, it defines a
baseline for performance measurement and project control, and it aids in communicating
clear work responsibilities. The main tools and techniques used in defining scope include
expert judgment, product analysis, alternatives generation, and facilitated workshops.
For example, a facilitator could have users, developers, and salespeople join a face-to-
face meeting or virtual meeting to exchange ideas about developing a new product. The
main outputs of scope definition are the project scope statement and project documents
updates.
Key inputs for preparing the project scope statement include the project charter,
scope management plan, requirements documentation, and organizational process assets
such as policies and procedures related to scope statements, as well as project files and
lessons learned from previous, similar projects. Table 5-2 shows the project charter for the
IT upgrade project described in the opening case. Notice how information from the project
charter provides a basis for further defining the project scope. The charter describes the
high-level scope, time, and cost goals for the project objectives and success criteria, a gen-
eral approach to accomplishing the project's goals, and the main roles and responsibilities
of important project stakeholders.
Although contents vary, project scope statements should include at least a product
scope description, product user acceptance criteria, and detailed information on all project
deliverables. It is also helpful to document other scope-related information, such as the
project boundaries, constraints, and assumptions. The project scope statement should also
TABLE 5-1
Requirement No.
Name
Category
Source
Status
R32
Laptop
memory
Hardware
Project charter and
corporate laptop
specifications
Complete. Laptops ordered meet
requirement by having 16 GB
of memory.
Cengage Learning 2016
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS

TABLE 5-2 4BNQMFQSPKFDUDIBSUFS
Project Title: Information Technology (IT) Upgrade Project
Project Start Date: March 4
Projected Finish Date: December 4
Key Schedule Milestones:
t
Inventory update completed April 15
t
Hardware and software acquired August 1
t
Installation completed October 1
t
Testing completed November 15
Budget Information: Budgeted $1,000,000 for hardware and software costs and $500,000 for labor costs.
Project Manager: Kim Nguyen, (310) 555-2784, knguyen@course.com
Project Objectives: Upgrade hardware and software for all employees (approximately 2,000) within nine
months based on new corporate standards. See attached sheet describing the new standards. Upgrades
may affect servers as well as associated network hardware and software.
Main Project Success Criteria: The hardware, software, and network upgrades must meet all written
specifications, be thoroughly tested, and be completed in nine months. Employee work disruptions will
be minimal.
Approach:
t
Update the IT inventory database to determine upgrade needs
t
Develop detailed cost estimate for project and report to CIO
t
Issue a request for quote to obtain hardware and software
t
Use internal staff as much as possible for planning, analysis, and installation
30-&4"/%3&410/4*#*-*5*&4
Name
Role
Responsibility
Walter Schmidt
CEO
Project sponsor, monitor project
Mike Zwack
CIO
Monitor project, provide staff
Kim Nguyen
Project Manager
Plan and execute project
Jeff Johnson
Director of IT Operations
Mentor Kim
Nancy Reynolds
VP, Human Resources
Provide staff, issue memo to all employees
about project
Steve McCann
Director of Purchasing
Assist in purchasing hardware and software
Sign-off: (Signatures of all the above stakeholders)
Comments: (Handwritten or typed comments from above stakeholders, if applicable)
"This project must be done within 10 months at the absolute latest." Mike Zwack, CIO
"We are assuming that adequate staff will be available and committed to supporting this project. Some
work must be done after hours to avoid work disruptions, and overtime will be provided." Jeff Johnson
and Kim Nguyen, IT department
Cengage Learning 2016
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
1SPKFDU4DPQF.BOBHFNFOU
193
reference supporting documents, such as product specifications that will affect what prod-
ucts are created or purchased, or corporate policies, which might affect how products or
services are produced. Many IT projects require detailed functional and design specifications
for developing software, which also should be referenced in the detailed scope statement.
As time progresses, the scope of a project should become more clear and specific.
For example, the project charter for the IT upgrade project in Table 5-2 includes a short
statement about the servers and other computers and software that the project may affect.
Table 5-3 provides an example of how the scope becomes progressively more detailed in
scope statements labeled Version 1 and Version 2.
Notice in Table 5-3 that the project scope statements often refer to related documents,
which can be product specifications, product brochures, or other plans. As more informa-
tion becomes available and decisions are made related to project scope, such as specific
products that will be purchased or changes that have been approved, the project team
should update the project scope statement. The team might name different iterations
of the scope statement Version 1, Version 2, and so on. These updates may also require
changes to other project documents. For example, if the company must purchase serv-
ers from a supplier it has never worked with before, the procurement management plan
should include information on working with that new supplier.
An up-to-date project scope statement is an important document for developing and
confirming a common understanding of the project scope. It describes in detail the work
to be accomplished on the project and is an important tool for ensuring customer satisfac-
tion and preventing scope creep, as described later in this chapter.
Recall from Chapter 1 the importance of addressing the triple constraint of project
management-meeting scope, time, and cost goals for a project. Time and cost goals are
normally straightforward. For example, the time goal for the IT upgrade project is nine
months, and the cost goal is $1.5 million. It is much more difficult to describe, agree upon,
and meet the scope goal of many projects.
TABLE 5-3 '
Project Charter:
Upgrades may affect servers ... (listed under Project Objectives)
Project Scope Statement, Version 1:
Servers: If additional servers are required to support this project, they must be compatible with existing
servers. If it is more economical to enhance existing servers, a detailed description of enhancements
must be submitted to the CIO for approval. See current server specifications provided in Attachment 6.
The CEO must approve a detailed plan describing the servers and their location at least two weeks
before installation.
Project Scope Statement, Version 2:
Servers: This project will require purchasing 10 new servers to support web, network, database,
application, and printing functions. Virtualization will be used to maximize efficiency. Detailed
descriptions of the servers are provided in a product brochure in Attachment 8, along with a plan
describing where they will be located.
Cengage Learning 2016
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS
194
M E D I A S N A P S H O T
Inaccurate requirements gathering continues to be one of the main causes of project
failure. Organizations lack the resources and maturity in requirements management,
which comes at a price. The authors of the 2014 PMI in-depth report on requirements
management state that "For every dollar spent on projects and programs, 5.1 percent is
wasted due to poor requirements management. Put in more striking terms, this amounts
to US$51 million wasted for every US$1billion spent. That's a lot of potential value falling
through the cracks in the project-driven world."6
The report provides the following survey results:
t
Forty-seven percent of organizations report that inaccurate requirements manage-
ment is the primary cause of projects not meeting their original goals and business
objectives.
t
Over half of organizations report not having adequate resources to perform require-
ments management well.
t
Only 24 percent of organizations report doing well in recognizing and developing
skills needed for effective management of requirements.
t
Only 46 percent of organizations report using a formal process to ensure unbiased
requirements validation for projects.
The report concludes by suggesting that organizations need to develop people, processes,
and culture to improve requirements management.
5.5 CREATING THE WORK BREAKDOWN STRUCTURE
After collecting requirements and defining scope, the next step in project scope manage-
ment is to create a work breakdown structure. A work breakdown structure (WBS) is a
deliverable-oriented grouping of the work involved in a project that defines its total scope.
Because most projects involve many people and many different deliverables, it is impor-
tant to organize and divide the work into logical parts based on how the work will be per-
formed. The WBS is a foundation document in project management because it provides
the basis for planning and managing project schedules, costs, resources, and changes.
Because the WBS defines the total scope of the project, some project management experts
believe that work should not be done on a project if it is not included in the WBS. There-
fore, it is crucial to develop a complete WBS.
The project scope management plan, scope statement, requirements documentation,
enterprise environmental factors, and organizational process assets are the primary inputs
for creating a WBS. The main tool or technique is decomposition-that is, subdividing
project deliverables into smaller pieces. The outputs of the process of creating the WBS
are the scope baseline and project documents updates. The scope baseline includes the
approved project scope statement and its associated WBS and WBS dictionary.
What does a WBS look like? A WBS is often depicted as a task-oriented tree of activi-
ties, similar to an organizational chart. A project team often organizes the WBS around
project products, project phases, or the project management process groups. Many people
like to create a WBS in chart form first to help them visualize the whole project and all of
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
1SPKFDU4DPQF.BOBHFNFOU

its main parts. Figure 5-3 shows a WBS for an intranet project. Notice that product areas
provide the basis for its organization. In this case, there are main boxes or groupings on
the WBS for developing the website design, the home page for the intranet, the marketing
department's pages, and the sales department's pages.
In contrast, a WBS for the same intranet project can be organized around project
phases, as shown in Figure 5-4.7 Notice that project phases of concept, website design,
website development, rollout, and support provide the basis for its organization.
Also note the levels in Figure 5-4. The name of the entire project is in the top box,
called Level 1, and the main groupings for the work are listed in the second tier of boxes,
called Level 2. This level numbering is based on the Project Management Institute's
Practice Standard for Work Breakdown Structures, Second Edition (2006). Each of the
boxes can be broken down into subsequent tiers of boxes to show the hierarchy of the
work. Many people and project management software tools use the term task to describe
each level of work in the WBS, although PMI does not use that term. For example, in
Figure 5-4 the following items can be referred to as tasks: the Level 2 item called
"Concept," the Level 3 item called "Define requirements," and the Level 4 item called
"Define user requirements." Tasks that are decomposed into smaller tasks are called
summary tasks.
Figure 5-4 shows a sample WBS in both chart and tabular form. Notice that both of
these formats show the same information. Many documents, such as contracts, use the
tabular format. Project management software also uses this format. The WBS becomes
the contents of the Task Name column in Microsoft Project, and the hierarchy or level
of tasks is shown by indenting and numbering tasks within the software. The numbering
shown in the tabular form is based on the Practice Standard for Work Breakdown Struc-
tures, Second Edition. The automatic numbering feature in Microsoft Project 2013 uses
this standard, but not all software does. Be sure to check with your organization to see
which numbering scheme it prefers to use for work breakdown structures. To avoid con-
fusion, it is important to decide on a numbering scheme and then use it when referring to
WBS items.
FIGURE 5-3 4BNQMFJOUSBOFU8#4PSHBOJ[FECZQSPEVDU
Website design
Home page design
Marketing pages
Sales pages
Intranet
Site map
Programs
Graphic design
Text
Hyperlinks
Images
Text
Hyperlinks
Images
Text
Hyperlinks
Images
¥$FOHBHF-FBSOJOH
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS

Also determine how you will name WBS items. Some organizations use only nouns to
focus on describing deliverables. For example, instead of Define requirements, the WBS
would say Requirements definition. Remember that the main purpose of the WBS is to
define all of the work required to complete a project, so focus on that while following your
organization's structural guidelines.
In Figure 5-4, the lowest level of the WBS is Level 4. A work package is a task at the
lowest level of the WBS. In Figure 5-4, tasks 1.2.1, 1.2.2, 1.2.3, and 1.2.4 (based on the
numbering on the left) are work packages. The other tasks would be broken down further.
However, some tasks can remain at Level 2 or 3 in the WBS. Others might be broken down
to Level 5 or 6, depending on the complexity of the work.
FIGURE 5-4 4BNQMFJOUSBOFU8#4PSHBOJ[
¥$FOHBHF-FBSOJOH
Level 1 - Entire Project
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Website
development
Concept
Website
design
Roll out
Support
Intranet
project
Evaluate
current
systems
Deﬁne
risks & risk
management
approach
Develop
project plan
Deﬁne
speciﬁc
functionality
Brief web
development
team
Deﬁne content
requirements
Deﬁne user
requirements
Deﬁne system
requirements
Deﬁne server
owner
requirements
Deﬁne
requirements
Chart
form
Tabular form with PMI numbering
1.1 Concept
1.1.1 Evaluate current systems
1.1.2 Deﬁne requirements
1.1.2.1 Deﬁne user requirements
1.1.2.2 Deﬁne content requirements
1.1.2.3 Deﬁne system requirements
1.1.2.4 Deﬁne server owner requirements
1.1.3 Deﬁne speciﬁc functionality
1.1.4 Deﬁne risks and risk management
approach
1.1.5 Develop project plan
1.1.6 Brief web development team
1.2 Website design
1.3 Website development
1.4 Roll out
1.5 Support
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
1SPKFDU4DPQF.BOBHFNFOU
197
A work package also represents the level of work that the project manager monitors
and controls. You can think of work packages in terms of accountability and reporting. If
a project has a relatively short time frame and requires weekly progress reports, a work
package might represent work completed in one week or less. If a project has a very long
time frame and requires quarterly progress reports, a work package might represent work
completed in one month or more. A work package might also be the procurement of a
specific product or products, such as an item or items purchased from an outside source.
A work package should be defined at the proper level so the project manager can clearly
establish an estimate of the effort needed to complete it, estimate the cost of all required
resources, and evaluate the quality of the results when the work package is finished.
When using project management software, estimates of work time should be entered
only at the work package level. The rest of the WBS items are just groupings or summary
tasks for the work packages. The software automatically calculates duration estimates for
various WBS levels based on data entered for each work package and the WBS hierarchy.
Figure 5-5 shows the phase-oriented intranet WBS, using the Microsoft Project number-
ing scheme from Figure 5-4, in the form of a Gantt chart created in Project 2013. You can see
from this figure that the WBS is the basis for project schedules. Notice that the WBS is in the
left part of the figure in the Task Name column. The resulting schedule is in the right part of
the figure. You will learn more about Gantt charts in Chapter 6, Project Time Management.
The example WBSs shown here are simplified so that they are somewhat easy to
understand and construct. Nevertheless, it is very difficult to create a good WBS. To cre-
ate a good WBS, you must understand the project and its scope and incorporate the needs
and knowledge of the stakeholders. The project manager and the project team must de-
cide as a group how to organize the work and how many levels to include in the WBS.
While many project managers have found that they should focus on doing the top
levels well before becoming bogged down in more detailed levels, it is also true that more
accurate estimates of scope, time, and cost are obtained when the project is defined ap-
propriately and in sufficient detail. Operating at too high a level increases project risk.
FIGURE 5-5 *OUSBOFU(BOUUDIBSUJO.JDSPTPGU1SPKFDU
6TFEXJUIQFSNJTTJPOGSPN.JDSPTPGU$PSQPSBUJPO
WBS
Schedule
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS
198
The act of defining the WBS is meant to offset that risk by considering the project's details
in advance of their execution.
Many people confuse tasks on a WBS with specifications. Tasks on a WBS represent
work that needs to be done to complete the project. For example, if you are creating a
WBS to redesign a kitchen, you might have Level 2 categories called design, purchasing,
flooring, walls, cabinets, and appliances. Under flooring, you might have tasks to remove
the old flooring, install the new flooring, and install the trim. You would not have tasks like
"12 ft. by 14 ft. of light oak" or "flooring must be durable"; these are specifications.
Another concern when creating a WBS is how to organize it to provide the basis for
the project schedule. You should focus on what work needs to be done and how it will be
done, not when it will be done. In other words, the tasks do not have to be developed as
a sequential list of steps. If you want some time-based flow for the work, you can create a
WBS using the project management process groups of initiating, planning, executing, mon-
itoring and controlling, and closing as Level 2 in the WBS. By doing this, not only does the
project team follow good project management practice, the WBS tasks can also be mapped
more easily against time. For example, Figure 5-6 shows a WBS and Gantt chart for the
intranet project, organized by the five project management process groups. Tasks under
initiating include selecting a project manager, forming the project team, and developing
the project charter. Tasks under planning include developing a scope statement, creating
a WBS, and developing and refining other plans, which would be broken down in more
detail for a real project. The tasks of concept, website design, website development, and
rollout, which were WBS Level 2 items in Figure 5-4, now become WBS Level 3 items un-
der executing. The executing tasks vary the most from project to project, but many of the
tasks under the other project management process groups would be similar for all proj-
ects. If you do not use the project management process groups in the WBS, you can have
a Level 2 category called "project management" to make sure you account for all tasks
WBS
Schedule
FIGURE 5-6 *OUSBOFUQSPKFDU(BOUUDIBSUPSHBOJ[
6TFEXJUIQFSNJTTJPOGSPN.JDSPTPGU$PSQPSBUJPO
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
1SPKFDU4DPQF.BOBHFNFOU
199
related to managing the project. Remember that all work should be included in the WBS,
including project management.
Some project teams like to list every deliverable they need to produce and then use
those as the basis for creating all or part of their WBS. In Chapter 3, JWD Consulting used
the project management process groups for the Level 2 items in its WBS for the project
management intranet site project. Then in breaking down the executing task, the project
team focused on the product deliverables it had to produce. Table 5-4 shows the categories
the team used for that part of the WBS. Recall that the scope statement should list and
describe all of the deliverables required for the project. It is very important to ensure con-
sistency between the project charter, scope statement, WBS, and Gantt chart to define the
scope of the project accurately.
It is also very important to involve the entire project team and the customer in creating
and reviewing the WBS. People who will do the work should help to plan the work by creat-
ing the WBS. Having group meetings to develop a WBS helps everyone understand what work
must be done for the entire project and how it should be done, given the people involved. It
also helps to identify where coordination between different work packages will be required.
5.5a Approaches to Developing Work Breakdown Structures
You can use several approaches to develop a work breakdown structure:
t
Using guidelines
t
The analogy approach
t
The top-down approach
t
The bottom-up approach
t
The mind-mapping approach
TABLE 5-4 &YFDVUJOH5BTLTGPS+8%$POTVMUJOHT8#4
3.0 Executing
3.1 Survey
3.2 User inputs
3.3 Intranet site content
3.3.1 Templates and tools
3.3.2 Articles
3.3.3 Links
3.3.4 Ask the Expert
3.3.5 User requests
3.4 Intranet site design
3.5 Intranet site construction
3.6 Site testing
3.7 Site promotion
3.8 Site rollout
3.9 Project benefits measurement
Cengage Learning 2016
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS

Using Guidelines
If guidelines exist for developing a WBS, it is very important to follow them. Some organi-
zations-the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD), for example-
prescribe the form and content for WBSs for particular projects. Many DOD projects
require contractors to prepare their proposals based on the DOD-provided WBS. These
proposals must include cost estimates for each task in the WBS at a detailed and summary
level. The cost for the entire project must be calculated by summing the costs of all of the
lower-level WBS tasks. When DOD personnel evaluate cost proposals, they must compare
the contractors' costs with the DOD's estimates. A large variation in costs for a certain
WBS task often indicates confusion as to what work must be done.
Consider a large automation project for the U.S. Air Force. In the mid-1980s, the Air
Force developed a request for proposals for the Local On-Line Network System (LONS) to
automate 15 Air Force Systems Command bases. This $250 million project involved provid-
ing the hardware and developing software for sharing documents such as contracts, specifi-
cations, and requests for proposals. The Air Force proposal guidelines included a WBS that
contractors were required to follow in preparing their cost proposals. Level 2 WBS items
included hardware, software development, training, and project management. The hardware
item was composed of several Level 3 items, such as servers, workstations, printers, and net-
work hardware. Air Force personnel reviewed the contractors' cost proposals against their
internal cost estimate, which was also based on this WBS. Having a prescribed WBS helped
contractors to prepare their cost proposals and helped the Air Force to evaluate them.
Many organizations provide guidelines and templates for developing WBSs, as well
as examples of WBSs from past projects. Microsoft Project 2013 comes with several
templates, and more are available on Microsoft's website and other sites. At the request
of many of its members, PMI developed a WBS Practice Standard to provide guidance
for developing and applying the WBS to project management. The Practice Standard
includes sample WBSs for a wide variety of projects in various industries, including proj-
ects for web design, telecom, service industry outsourcing, and software implementation.
Project managers and their teams should review appropriate information to develop
their unique project WBSs more efficiently. For example, Kim Nguyen and key team mem-
bers from the opening case should review their company's WBS guidelines, templates, and
other related information before and during the team meetings to create their WBS.
The Analogy Approach
Another method for constructing a WBS is the analogy approach. In the analogy
approach, you use a similar project's WBS as a starting point. For example, Kim Nguyen
from the opening case might learn that one of her organization's suppliers did a similar IT
upgrade project last year. She could ask them to share their WBS for that project to pro-
vide a starting point for her own project.
McDonnell Aircraft Company, now part of Boeing, provides an example of using an
analogy approach when creating WBSs. McDonnell Aircraft Company designed and manu-
factured several different fighter aircraft. When creating a WBS for a new aircraft design, it
started by using 74 predefined subsystems for building fighter aircraft based on past expe-
rience. There was a Level 2 WBS item for the airframe that was composed of Level 3 items
such as a forward fuselage, center fuselage, aft fuselage, and wings. This generic, product-
oriented WBS provided a starting point for defining the scope of new aircraft projects and
developing cost estimates for new aircraft designs.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
1SPKFDU4DPQF.BOBHFNFOU

Some organizations keep a repository of WBSs and other project documentation on
file to assist people working on projects. Project 2013 and many other software tools in-
clude sample files to assist users in creating a WBS and Gantt chart. Viewing examples of
WBSs from similar projects allows you to understand different ways to create a WBS.
The Top-Down and Bottom-Up Approaches
Two other methods of creating WBSs are the top-down and bottom-up approaches. Most
project managers consider the top-down approach of WBS construction to be conventional.
To use the top-down approach, start with the largest items of the project and break
them into subordinate items. This process involves refining the work into greater and
greater levels of detail. For example, Figure 5-4 shows how work was broken down to Level
4 for part of the intranet project. After finishing the process, all resources should be as-
signed at the work package level. The top-down approach is best suited to project manag-
ers who have vast technical insight and a big-picture perspective.
In the bottom-up approach, team members first identify as many specific tasks
related to the project as possible. They then aggregate the specific tasks and organize
them into summary activities, or higher levels in the WBS. For example, a group of people
might be responsible for creating a WBS to develop an e-commerce application. Instead of
looking for guidelines on how to create a WBS or viewing WBSs from similar projects, they
could begin by listing detailed tasks they think they would need to perform in order to cre-
ate the application. After listing these detailed tasks, they would group the tasks into cat-
egories. Then they would group these categories into higher-level categories. Some people
have found that writing all possible tasks as notes and then placing them on a wall helps
the team see all the work required for the project and develop logical groupings for per-
forming the work. For example, a business analyst on the project team might know that
it had to define user requirements and content requirements for the e-commerce applica-
tion. These tasks might be part of the requirements documents the team would have to
create as one of the project deliverables. A hardware specialist might know that the team
had to define system requirements and server requirements, which would also be part of
a requirements document. As a group, they might decide to put all four of these tasks un-
der a higher-level item called "define requirements" that would result in the delivery of a
requirements document. Later, they might realize that defining requirements should fall
under a broader category of concept design for the e-commerce application, along with
other groups of tasks related to the concept design. The bottom-up approach can be very
time-consuming, but it can also be a very effective way to create a WBS. Project managers
often use the bottom-up approach for projects that represent entirely new systems or ap-
proaches to doing a job, or to help create buy-in and synergy with a project team.
Mind Mapping
Some project managers like to use mind mapping to help develop WBSs. As described in
Chapter 4 during the discussion of SWOT analysis, mind mapping is a technique that uses
branches radiating from a core idea to structure thoughts and ideas. Instead of writing
down tasks in a list or immediately trying to create a structure for tasks, mind mapping
allows people to write and even draw pictures of ideas in a nonlinear format. This more
visual, less structured approach to defining and then grouping tasks can unlock creativity
among individuals and increase participation and morale among teams.8
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS

Source: MatchWare's MindView 4 Business Edition
FIGURE 5-7 #4
Figure 5-7 shows a diagram that uses mind mapping to create a WBS for the IT up-
grade project. The rectangle near the center represents the entire project. Each of the four
main branches radiating from the center represents the main tasks or Level 2 items for
the WBS. Different people at the meeting who are creating this mind map might have dif-
ferent roles in the project, which could help in deciding the tasks and WBS structure. For
example, Kim would want to focus on all of the project management tasks, and she might
also know that they will be tracked in a separate budget category. People who are familiar
with acquiring or installing hardware and software might focus on that work, and so on.
Branching off from the main task called "Upgrade inventory" are two subtasks, "Perform
physical inventory" and "Update database." Branching off from the "Perform physical in-
ventory" subtask are three further subdivisions labeled Building A, Building B, and Build-
ing C. The team would continue to add branches and items until they exhausted ideas for
what work needs to be performed.
After discovering WBS items and their structure using the mind-mapping technique,
you could then translate the information into chart or tabular form, as described earlier.
A feature of MindView 4.0 Business Edition software is that you can click a single icon to
convert a mind map into a Gantt chart. The mind map provides the task list based on the
WBS. MindView also lets you enter information about tasks, such as dependencies and
durations, to generate a complete Gantt chart. You can also export your mind map into
Microsoft Project. The WBS is entered in the Task List column, and the structure is cre-
ated automatically based on the mind map. Figure 5-8 shows the resulting Gantt charts for
the IT upgrade project both in MindView 4.0 and Project 2013. See Appendix A for more
information on using Project 2013.
Mind mapping can be used for developing WBSs using the top-down or bottom-up
approach. For example, you could conduct mind mapping for an entire project by listing
the project in the center of a document, adding the main categories on branches radiat-
ing from the center, and then adding branches for appropriate subcategories. You could
also develop a separate mind-mapping diagram for each deliverable and then merge them
to create one large diagram for the entire project. You can also add items anywhere on
a mind-mapping document without following a strict top-down or bottom-up approach.
After the mind-mapping documents are complete, you can convert them into a chart or
tabular WBS form.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
1SPKFDU4DPQF.BOBHFNFOU

5.5b The WBS Dictionary
Many of the items listed on the sample WBSs are rather vague. What exactly does
"Update database" mean, for example? The person responsible for this task might think
that it does not need to be broken down any further, which could be fine. However, the
task should be described in more detail so everyone has the same understanding of what
it involves. What if someone else has to perform the task? What would you tell that team
member to do? What will it cost to complete the task? More detailed information is
needed to answer these and other questions.
A WBS dictionary is a document that provides detailed information about each WBS
item. The term dictionary should not be confused with defining terms or acronyms in this
case; such definitions belong in a glossary that would be included elsewhere in the project
documentation. Instead, the WBS dictionary is a definition of the work involved in the
task-a clarification that makes the summary description in the WBS easier to understand
in terms of the approach taken to complete the work.
The format of the WBS dictionary can vary based on project needs. It might be appro-
priate to have a short paragraph describing each work package. For a more complex proj-
ect, an entire page or more might be needed for each of the work package descriptions.
Some projects might require that each WBS item describe the responsible organization,
resource requirements, estimated costs, dependencies with other activities, and other in-
formation. Project teams often review WBS dictionary entries from similar tasks to get a
better idea of how to create their entries.
FIGURE 5-8 (BOUUDIBSUTXJUI8#4HFOFSBUFEGSPNBNJOENBQ
4PVSDF.BUDI8BSFT.JOE7JFX#VTJOFTT&EJUJPO
MindView 4.0 Gantt Chart
Project 2013 Gantt Chart
6TFEXJUIQFSNJTTJPOGSPN.JDSPTPGU$PSQPSBUJPO
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS

In the IT upgrade project described in the opening case, Kim should work with her
team and sponsor to determine the level of detail needed in the WBS dictionary. They
should also decide where this information will be entered and how it will be updated. Kim
and her team decided to enter all of the WBS dictionary information into their enterprise
project management system, following departmental guidelines. Table 5-5 is an example of
one entry.
The approved project scope statement and its associated WBS and WBS dictionary
form the scope baseline. Performance in meeting project scope goals is based on this
scope baseline.
5.5c Advice for Creating a WBS and WBS Dictionary
As stated previously, creating a good WBS is no easy task and usually requires several
iterations. Often, it is best to use a combination of approaches to create a project's WBS.
Some basic principles, however, apply to creating any good WBS and its WBS dictionary.
t
A unit of work should appear in only one place in the WBS.
t
The work content of a WBS item is the sum of the WBS items below it.
t
A WBS item is the responsibility of only one person, even though many
people might be working on it.
t
The WBS must be consistent with the way work actually will be performed; it
should serve the project team first, and serve other purposes only if practical.
t
Project team members should be involved in developing the WBS to ensure
consistency and buy-in.
TABLE 5-5 4BNQMF8#4EJDUJPOBSZFOUSZ
WBS Dictionary Entry March 20
Project Title: Information Technology (IT) Upgrade Project
WBS Item Number: 2.2
WBS Item Name: Update Database
Description: The IT department maintains an online database of hardware and software on the
corporate intranet. We need to make sure that we know exactly what hardware and software employees
are currently using and if they have any unique needs before we decide what to order for the upgrade.
This task will involve reviewing information from the current database, producing reports that list each
department's employees and location, and updating the data after performing the physical inventory and
receiving inputs from department managers. Our project sponsor will send a notice to all department
managers to communicate the importance of this project and this particular task. In addition to general
hardware and software upgrades, the project sponsors will ask the department managers to provide
information for any unique requirements they might have that could affect the upgrades. This task also
includes updating the inventory data for network hardware and software. After updating the inventory
database, we will send an e-mail to each department manager to verify the information and make
changes online as needed. Department managers will be responsible for ensuring that their people are
available and cooperative during the physical inventory. Completing this task is dependent on WBS Item
Number 2.1, Perform Physical Inventory, and must precede WBS Item Number 3.0, Acquire Hardware
and Software.
Cengage Learning 2016
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
1SPKFDU4DPQF.BOBHFNFOU

t
Each WBS item must be documented in a WBS dictionary to ensure accurate
understanding of the scope of work included and not included in that item.
t
The WBS must be a flexible tool to accommodate inevitable changes while
properly maintaining control of the work content in the project according to
the scope statement.9
5.6 VALIDATING SCOPE
It is difficult to create a good project scope statement and WBS for a project. It is even
more difficult, especially on IT projects, to verify the project scope and minimize scope
changes. Some project teams know from the start that the scope is very unclear and that
they must work closely with the project customer to design and produce various deliver-
ables. In this case, the project team must develop a process for scope validation that meets
unique project needs. Careful procedures must be developed to ensure that customers are
getting what they want and that the project team has enough time and money to produce
the desired products and services.
Even when the project scope is fairly well defined, many IT projects suffer from scope
creep-the tendency for project scope to keep getting bigger and bigger. There are many
horror stories about IT projects failing due to problems such as scope creep, including a
few classic examples in the following What Went Wrong? feature. For this reason, it is very
important to verify the project scope with users throughout the life of the project and de-
velop a process for controlling scope changes.
Scope creep can also be a good thing, if managed well. Later in this chapter, you can
see how Northwest Airlines encouraged scope changes on its ResNet project and managed
them well.
W H A T W E N T W R O N G ?
A project scope that is too broad and grandiose can cause severe problems. Scope creep
and an overemphasis on technology for technology's sake resulted in the bankruptcy of a
large pharmaceutical firm, Texas-based FoxMeyer Drug. In 1994, the CIO was pushing for
a $65 million system to manage the company's critical operations. He did not believe in
keeping things simple, however. The company spent nearly $10 million on state-of-the-
art hardware and software and contracted the management of the project to a prestigious
(and expensive) consulting firm. The project included building an $18 million robotic
warehouse, which looked like something out of a science fiction movie, according to in-
siders. The scope of the project kept getting bigger and more impractical. The elaborate
warehouse was not ready on time, and the new system generated erroneous orders that
cost FoxMeyer Drug more than $15 million in unrecovered excess shipments. In July
1996, the company took a $34 million charge for its fourth fiscal quarter, and by August
of that year, FoxMeyer Drug filed for bankruptcy.10
Another classic example of scope creep comes from McDonald's Restaurants. In
2001, the fast-food chain initiated a project to create an intranet that would connect
its headquarters with all of its restaurants and provide detailed operational information
continued
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS

Scope validation involves formal acceptance of the completed project deliverables.
This acceptance is often achieved by a customer inspection and then sign-off on key deliv-
erables. To receive formal acceptance of the project scope, the project team must develop
clear documentation of the project's products and procedures to evaluate whether they
were completed correctly and satisfactorily. Recall from Chapter 4 that configuration
management specialists identify and document the functional and physical characteristics
of the project's products, record and report the changes, and audit the products to verify
conformance to requirements. To minimize scope changes, it is crucial to do a good job of
configuration management and validating project scope.
The scope management plan, scope baseline, requirements documentation, require-
ments traceability matrix, validated deliverables, and work performance data are the main
inputs for scope validation. The main tools for performing scope validation are inspection
and group decision-making techniques. The customer, sponsor, or user inspects the work
after it is delivered and decides if it meets requirements. The main outputs of scope vali-
dation are accepted deliverables, change requests, work performance information, and
project documents updates. For example, suppose that Kim's team members deliver up-
graded computers to users as part of the IT upgrade project. Several users might complain
because the computers did not include special keyboards they need for medical reasons.
Appropriate people would review this change request and take appropriate corrective ac-
tion, such as getting sponsor approval for purchasing the special keyboards.
in real time. For example, headquarters would know if sales were slowing or if the grill
temperature was correct in every single store-all 30,000 of them in more than 120
countries. McDonald's would not divulge detailed information, but they admitted that the
project was too large in scale and scope. After spending $170 million on consultants and
initial implementation planning, McDonald's realized that the project was too much to
handle and terminated it.11
Another major scope problem on IT projects is a lack of user involvement. A prime
example occurred in the late 1980s at Northrop Grumman, which specializes in defense
electronics, IT, advanced aircraft, shipbuilding, and space technology. An IT project team
there became convinced that it should automate the review and approval process of gov-
ernment proposals. The team implemented a powerful workflow system to manage the
whole process. Unfortunately, the end users of the system were aerospace engineers who
preferred to work in a more casual, ad hoc fashion. They dubbed the system "Naziware"
and refused to use it. This example illustrates an IT project that wasted millions of dol-
lars developing a system that was not in touch with the way end users did their work.12
Failing to follow good project management processes and use off-the-shelf software also
results in scope problems. 21st Century Insurance Group in Woodland Hills, California,
paid Computer Sciences Corporation $100 million to develop a system for managing
business applications, including managing insurance policies, billing, claims, and cus-
tomer service. After five years, the system was still in development and supported less
than 2 percent of the company's business. Joshua Greenbaum, an analyst at Enterprise
Applications Consulting, called the project a "huge disaster" and questioned the insur-
ance company's ability "to manage a process that is pretty well known these days. ... I'm
surprised that there wasn't some way to build what they needed using off-the-shelf com-
ponents and lower their risk."13
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
1SPKFDU4DPQF.BOBHFNFOU

G L O B A L I S S U E S
Many countries have had difficulties controlling the scope of large projects, especially
those that involve advanced technologies and many different users. For example, the
state government of Victoria, Australia, introduced a public transportation smart card,
called myki, in 2010. Public Transport Victoria's description of the card included the fol-
lowing information: "Many cities around the world have public transport smart cards.
myki has been designed to fit our State's unique needs. myki users enjoy an integrated
ticketing system that works across the state on trains, trams and buses."14
Unfortunately, there were many problems in developing and implementing the smart
cards. The $1.35 billion system became valid on all forms of Melbourne public transporta-
tion in July 2010, three years and five months after it was meant to replace the Metcard.
Users' initial reactions to the myki smart card were mixed, with several reports of myki
readers not working on trams. Many skeptics said they would wait until problems were
fixed before trying the new system.15 Many articles described problems with the myki
card, revealing obvious difficulty in validating the scope of this high-visibility project. The
Public Transport Users Association (PTUA) compiled a long list of problems with the new
card and suggested that people stick to using the old card for a while. Clearly, the new
system did not meet user requirements and had major flaws. In January 2012, over
18 months after the myki rollout, 70 percent of users still used the old Metcard. The gov-
ernment decided to keep myki in June 2011 after estimating that it would cost taxpayers
more than $1 billion to scrap the troubled system. The Metcard was planned to be phased
out for good by the end of 2012. PTUA president Daniel Bowen was not certain that the
transition would go smoothly. "To a certain extent it makes sense to bring people across
(to myki) because you can't have two systems running at the same time forever. ... Once
you get the majority of people using myki though, they'd better make sure it's humming,
otherwise there could be chaos."16 Myki continued to make headlines in 2015, but not in
a good way. "Two years after myki became the only ticket in town, frustrated commuters
say the system is still riddled with issues."17
5.7 CONTROLLING SCOPE
As you learned in Chapter 4 when you studied integrated change control, change is
inevitable on projects, especially changes to the scope of IT projects. Scope control
involves managing changes to the project scope while keeping project goals and business
strategy in mind. Users often are not sure how they want screens to look or what
functionality they will need to improve business performance. Developers are not ex-
actly sure how to interpret user requirements, and they also have to deal with constantly
changing technologies.
The goal of scope control is to influence the factors that cause scope changes, to en-
sure that changes are processed according to procedures developed as part of integrated
change control, and to manage changes when they occur. You cannot do a good job of
controlling scope if you do not first do a good job of collecting requirements, defining
scope, and validating scope. How can you prevent scope creep when you have not agreed
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS

on the work to be performed and your sponsor has not validated that the proposed work
is acceptable? You also need to develop a process for soliciting and monitoring changes to
project scope. Stakeholders should be encouraged to suggest changes that will benefit the
overall project and discouraged from suggesting unnecessary changes.
The project management plan, requirements documentation, requirements traceabil-
ity matrix, work performance data, and organizational process assets are the main inputs
to scope control. An important tool for performing scope control is variance analysis.
Variance is the difference between planned and actual performance. For example, if a
supplier was supposed to deliver five special keyboards and you received only four, the
variance would be one keyboard. The outputs of scope control include work performance
information, change requests, project management plan updates, project documents up-
dates, and organizational process assets updates.
Table 1-2 in Chapter 1 lists the top 10 factors that help IT projects succeed. Four of
these 10 factors are related to scope validation and control: user involvement, executive
support, clear business objectives, and optimizing scope. To avoid project failures, there-
fore, it is crucial for IT project managers and their teams to improve user input and execu-
tive support and reduce incomplete and changing requirements.
The following sections provide more suggestions for improving scope management on
IT projects.
5.7a Suggestions for Improving User Input
Lack of user input leads to problems with managing scope creep and controlling change.
How can you manage this important issue? The following suggestions can help a project
team improve user input:
t
Develop a good project selection process for IT projects. Insist that all projects
have a sponsor from the user organization. The sponsor should not work in the IT
department, nor should the sponsor be the project manager. Project information,
including the project charter, project management plan, project scope statement,
WBS, and WBS dictionary, should be easily available in the organization. Making
basic project information available will help avoid duplication of effort and ensure
that the most important projects are the ones on which people are working.
t
Have users on the project team. Some organizations require project managers
to come from the business area of the project instead of the IT group. Some
organizations assign co-project managers to IT projects, one from IT and one
from the main business group. Users should be assigned full-time to large IT
projects and part-time to smaller projects. A key success factor in Northwest
Airlines' ResNet project was training reservation agents-the users-how to
write programming code for their new reservation system. (See the compan-
ion website for this text to read the entire case study for the ResNet project.)
Because the sales agents had intimate knowledge of the business, they pro-
vided excellent input and actually created most of the software.
t
Have regular meetings with defined agendas. The idea of meeting regularly
sounds obvious, but many IT projects fail because the project team members
do not have regular interaction with users. They assume that they under-
stand what users need without getting direct feedback. To encourage this in-
teraction, users should sign off on key deliverables presented at meetings.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
1SPKFDU4DPQF.BOBHFNFOU

t
Deliver something to project users and sponsors on a regular basis. If the
delivered product is hardware or software, make sure it works first.
t
Do not promise to deliver what the team cannot deliver in a particular time
frame. Make sure the project schedule allows enough time to produce the
deliverables.
t
Locate users with the developers. People often get to know each other better
by being in close proximity. If the users cannot be physically moved to be
near developers during the entire project, they should set aside certain days
to work in the same location.
5.7b Suggestions for Reducing Incomplete and Changing Requirements
Some requirement changes are expected on IT projects, but many projects have too many
changes to their requirements, especially during later stages of the project life cycle when
it is more difficult to implement changes. The following suggestions can help improve the
requirements process:
t
Develop and follow a requirements management process that includes proce-
dures for determining initial requirements.
t
Employ techniques such as prototyping, use case modeling, and Joint
Application Design to understand user requirements thoroughly. Prototyping
involves developing a working replica of the system or some aspect of the sys-
tem. These working replicas may be throwaways or an incremental compo-
nent of the deliverable system. Prototyping is an effective tool for gaining an
understanding of requirements, determining the feasibility of requirements,
and resolving user interface uncertainties. Use case modeling is a process
for identifying and modeling business events, who initiated them, and how
the system should respond to them. It is an effective tool for understanding
requirements of information systems. Joint Application Design (JAD) uses
highly organized and intensive workshops to bring together project stake-
holders-the sponsor, users, business analysts, programmers, and so on-to
jointly define and design information systems. These techniques also help us-
ers become more active in defining system requirements. Consult a systems
analysis and design text for details on these techniques.
t
Put all requirements in writing and keep them current and readily available.
Several tools are available to automate this function. For example, a type
of software called a requirements management tool aids in capturing and
maintaining requirements information, provides immediate access to the
information, and assists in establishing necessary relationships between re-
quirements and information created by other tools.
t
Create a requirements management database for documenting and control-
ling requirements. Computer Aided Software Engineering (CASE) tools or
other technologies can assist in maintaining a repository for project data. A
CASE tool's database can also be used to document and control requirements.
t
Provide adequate testing to verify that the project's products perform as ex-
pected. Conduct testing throughout the project life cycle. Chapter 8, Project
Quality Management, includes more information on testing.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
$IBQUFS

t
Use a process for reviewing requested requirements changes from a systems
perspective. For example, ensure that project scope changes include associ-
ated cost and schedule changes. Require approval via signatures of appropri-
ate stakeholders. It is crucial for the project manager to lead the team in its
focus on achieving approved scope goals and not getting sidetracked into
doing additional work. For example, in his book Alpha Project Managers,
Andy Crowe tried to uncover what the best or "alpha" project managers do
differently from other project managers. One of these alpha project managers
explained how he learned an important lesson about scope control:
Toward the end of some projects I've worked on, the managers made
their teams work these really long hours. After the second or third time
this happened, I just assumed that this was the way things worked. Then
I got to work with a manager who planned everything out really well and
ran the team at a good pace the whole time, and we kept on schedule.
When the customer found out that things were on schedule, he kept try-
ing to increase the scope, but we had a good manager this time, and she
wouldn't let him do it without adjusting the baselines. That was the first
time I was on a project that finished everything on time and on budget,
and I was amazed at how easy she made it look.18
t
Emphasize completion dates. For example, a project manager at Farmland
Industries, Inc. in Kansas City, Missouri, kept her 15-month, $7 million integrated
supply-chain project on track by setting the project deadline. She said, "May 1
was the drop-dead date, and everything else was backed into it. Users would come
to us and say they wanted something, and we'd ask them what they wanted to
give up to get it. Sticking to the date is how we managed scope creep."19
t
Allocate resources specifically for handling change requests. For example,
Peeter Kivestu and his ResNet team at Northwest Airlines knew that users
would request enhancements to the reservations system they were developing.
They provided a special function key on the ResNet screen for users to submit
their requests, and the project included three full-time programmers to handle
these requests. Users made over 11,000 enhancement requests. The managers
who sponsored the four main software applications had to prioritize the soft-
ware enhancement requests and decide as a group what changes to approve.
The three programmers then implemented as many items as they could, in
priority order, given the time they had. Although they only implemented
38 percent of the requested enhancements, they were the most important
ones, and the users were very satisfied with the system and process.
5.8 USING SOFTWARE TO ASSIST IN
PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT
Project managers and their teams can use several types of software to assist in project
scope management. As shown in several of the figures and tables in this chapter, you
can use word-processing software to create scope-related documents, and most people
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1SPKFDU4DPQF.BOBHFNFOU
use spreadsheet or presentation software to develop various charts, graphs, and ma-
trixes related to scope management. Mind-mapping software can be useful in develop-
ing a WBS. Project stakeholders also transmit project scope management information
using various types of communication software such as e-mail and assorted web-based
applications.
Project management software helps you develop a WBS, which serves as a basis
for creating Gantt charts, assigning resources, allocating costs, and performing other
tasks. You can also use the templates that come with various project management
software products to help you create a WBS for your project. (See the section on proj-
ect scope management in Appendix A for detailed information on using Project 2013,
and see the companion website for information on templates related to project scope
management.)
You can also use many types of specialized software to assist in project scope
management. Many IT projects use special software for requirements management,
prototyping, modeling, and other scope-related work. Because scope is such a crucial
part of project management, many software products are available to assist in managing
project scope. For example, Gartner estimates that the market for requirements defini-
tion and management tools was $280 million in 2014 and growing over 3 percent annu-
ally. New tools focus on improving collaboration and speed to better address mass market
needs.20
Project scope management is very important, especially on IT projects. After selecting
projects, organizations must plan scope management, collect the requirements and define
the scope of the work, break down the work into manageable pieces, validate the scope
with project stakeholders, and manage changes to project scope. Using the basic project
management concepts, tools, and techniques discussed in this chapter can help you
manage project scope successfully.
C A S E W R A P - U P
Kim Nguyen reviewed guidelines for creating WBSs that were provided by her company
and other sources. She had a meeting with the three team leaders for her project to get
their input on how to proceed. They reviewed several sample documents and decided to
have major groupings for their project based on updating the inventory database, acquir-
ing the necessary hardware and software, installing the hardware and software, and per-
forming project management. After they decided on a basic approach, Kim led a meeting
with the entire project team of 12 people, with some attending virtually. She reviewed
the project charter and stakeholder register, described the basic approach they would
use to collect requirements and define the project scope, and reviewed sample WBSs.
Kim opened the floor for questions, which she answered confidently. She then let each
team leader work with his or her people to start writing the detailed scope statement and
their sections of the WBS and WBS dictionary. Everyone participated in the meeting,
sharing their expertise and openly asking questions. Kim could see that the project was
off to a good start.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
212
Chapter 5
Chapter Summary
Project scope management includes the processes to ensure that the project addresses all the work
required to complete the project successfully. The main processes include planning scope management,
collecting requirements, defining scope, creating the WBS, validating scope, and controlling scope.
The first step in project scope management is planning scope management. The project
team reviews information and uses expert judgment and meetings to help create a scope
management plan and requirements management plan.
The next step is collecting requirements, a crucial part of many IT projects. It is important to
review the project charter and meet with key stakeholders listed in the stakeholder register when
collecting requirements. The main outputs of this process are requirements documentation and a
requirements traceability matrix.
A project scope statement is created in the scope definition process. This document often
includes a product scope description, product user acceptance criteria, detailed information on all pro-
ject deliverables, and information on project boundaries, constraints, and assumptions. There are often
several versions of the project scope statement to keep scope information detailed and up to date.
A work breakdown structure (WBS) is a deliverable-oriented grouping of the work involved in
a project that defines its total scope. The WBS forms the basis for planning and managing project
schedules, costs, resources, and changes. You cannot use project management software without
first creating a good WBS. A WBS dictionary is a document that provides detailed information
about each WBS item. A good WBS is often difficult to create because of the complexity of the
project. There are several approaches for developing a WBS, including using guidelines, the
analogy approach, the top-down approach, the bottom-up approach, and mind mapping.
Validating scope involves formal acceptance of the completed project deliverables. Control-
ling scope involves controlling changes to the project scope.
Poor project scope management is one of the key reasons projects fail. For IT projects, it is
important for good project scope management to have strong user involvement, executive sup-
port, a clear statement of requirements, and a process for managing scope changes.
Many software products are available to assist in project scope management. The WBS is a key
concept in properly using project management software because it provides the basis for entering tasks.
Quick Quiz
1. _______ refer(s) to all the work involved in creating the products of the project and the pro-
cesses used to create them.
a.
Deliverables
b.
Milestones
c.
Scope
d.
Product development
2. Which tool or technique for collecting requirements is often the most expensive and time
consuming?
a.
interviews
b.
focus groups
c.
surveys
d.
observation
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
213
Project Scope Management
3. A _______ is a deliverable-oriented grouping of the work involved in a project that defines its
total scope.
a.
scope statement
b.
WBS
c.
WBS dictionary
d.
work package
4. What approach to developing a WBS involves writing down or drawing ideas in a nonlinear format?
a.
top-down
b.
bottom-up
c.
analogy
d.
mind mapping
5. Assume that you have a project with major categories called planning, analysis, design, and
testing. What level of the WBS would these items fall under?
a.
0
b.
1
c.
2
d.
3
6. Which of the following is not a best practice that can help in avoiding scope problems on
IT projects?
a.
Keep the scope realistic.
b.
Use off-the-shelf hardware and software whenever possible.
c.
Follow good project management processes.
d.
Don't involve too many users in scope management.
7. Why did McDonald's terminate a large project after spending $170 million on it?
a.
The company found a better technology.
b.
The company decided to outsource the work.
c.
The scope was too much to handle.
d.
The government requirement that prompted the project was repealed.
8. Scope _______ is often achieved by a customer inspection and then sign-off on key
deliverables.
a.
acceptance
b.
validation
c.
completion
d.
close-out
9. Which of the following is not a suggestion for improving user input?
a.
Develop a good project selection process for IT projects.
b.
Have users on the project team.
c.
Co-locate users with developers.
d.
Only have meetings as needed, not on a regular basis.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
214
Chapter 5
10. Project management software helps you develop a _______, which serves as a basis for
creating Gantt charts, assigning resources, and allocating costs.
a.
project plan
b.
schedule
c.
WBS
d.
deliverable
Quick Quiz Answers
1. c; 2. a; 3. b; 4. d; 5. c; 6. d; 7. c; 8. b; 9. d; 10. c
Discussion Questions
1. What is involved in project scope management, and why is good project scope management
so important on IT projects?
2. What is involved in collecting requirements for a project? Why is it often difficult to do?
3. Discuss the process of defining project scope in more detail as a project progresses,
going from information in a project charter to a project scope statement, WBS, and WBS
dictionary.
4. Describe different ways to develop a WBS and explain why it is often so difficult to do.
5. What is the main technique used for validating scope? Give an example of scope validation
on a project.
6. Using examples in this book or online, describe a project that suffered from scope creep.
Could it have been avoided? How? Can scope creep be a good thing? When? What can
organizations do to successfully manage inevitable changes in scope that are good for
business?
7. Why do you need a good WBS to use project management software? What other types of
software can you use to assist in project scope management?
Exercises
1. You are working on a project to develop a new or enhanced system to help people at your
college, university, or organization to find jobs. The system must be tailored to your student
or work population and be very easy to use. Write a short paper describing how you would
collect requirements for this system, and include at least five requirements in a requirements
traceability matrix.
2. Read the report cited in the chapter called PMI's Pulse of the Profession: Requirements
Management-A Core Competency for Project and Program Success. Find one or two
other reports on requirements management written in the past year. Summarize the findings
of the reports and your opinion on the topic.
3. Use MindView Business software to develop a WBS in chart form by creating a new file or
map in Top Down view. You can download a 30-day trial of MindView Business from
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
215
Project Scope Management
www.matchware.com/itpm. (The chart should be similar to an organizational chart-see
the sample at the top of Figure 5-4). Assume that the Level 1 category is called Software
Project, and that the Level 2 categories are Initiating, Planning, Executing, Monitoring and
Controlling, and Closing. Under the Executing section, include Level 3 categories of Analy-
sis, Design, Prototyping, Testing, Implementation, and Support. Assume that the Support
category includes Level 4 items for Training, Documentation, User Support, and Enhance-
ments. Print the WBS in chart form. Show the same information in a Gantt chart by selecting
View from the menu bar in MindView Business, then Gantt. Widen the Task Name column
and select Number Scheme from the menu bar to add a numbering scheme. Save your file
and then print just the Task Name column of the Gantt chart view by taking a screen shot
and cropping the screen. Your results should resemble those in Figure 5-9.
4. Create the same WBS described in Exercise 3 using Microsoft Project 2013 and indenting
categories appropriately. Use the outline numbering feature to display the outline numbers,
or enter the numbers manually. Notice that Project 2013 uses PMI's standard numbering
scheme, but MindView does not. You may want to enter the numbers to ensure that they ap-
pear as desired and are displayed in all reports. Microsoft Project does not include automatic
FIGURE 5-9 Top-down WBS and Gantt chart created in MindView Business Software
Source: MatchWare's MindView 4 Business Edition
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
216
Chapter 5
numbers in reports. Do not enter any durations or dependencies. See Appendix A or Project
2013's Help for instructions on creating a WBS. Print the resulting Gantt chart on one page,
and be sure to display the entire Task Name column.
5. Using the file you created in MindView for Exercise 3, export the WBS into Project 2013.
Open the file, select the MindView icon in the upper-left portion of the toolbar, select Export,
select Microsoft Project, and name the file. The file opens in Project 2013. Make adjustments
as needed and then print the Gantt chart from Project 2013.
6. Create a WBS for one of the following projects:
r
Introducing self-checkout registers at your school's bookstore
r
Providing a new Internet cafe onsite at your organization
r
Developing an app that you and a friend will create and sell online within three months
r
Earning your CAPM or PMP certification
Decide on all of the Level 2 categories for the WBS. Use your choice of software to create a
WBS in chart form and as tasks in a Gantt chart. Do not enter any durations or dependen-
cies. Be sure to include all of the deliverables and work required for the project. Make notes
of questions you had while completing this exercise.
7. Review three different template files from Microsoft Project 2013, MindView, or any other
project management software tool. What do you think about the WBSs? Write a short pa-
per summarizing your analysis, and provide at least three suggestions for improving one of
the WBSs.
8. Research the benefits of and requirements for earning a certification in business analysis,
as described in the What Went Right feature in this chapter. Summarize your findings in a
short paper.
Running Case
You have been selected as the project manager for the Global Treps project. You helped to run
a local shark tank like event at your college last year as part of a class project, so you have a
general idea of what is involved. The schedule goal is six months, and the budget is $120,000.
Your favorite professor, Dr. K., and a few of her associates have agreed to fund the project. Your
strengths are your organizational and leadership skills.
You are a senior, live on-campus, and get free room and board by being a resident assis-
tant in your dorm. Bobby, a computer whiz who funded a lot of his college expenses by build-
ing websites, will be your main technical guy on the project. He goes to your college and lives
off-campus. Three other people will form your core project team: Kim, a new college grad now
working for a non-profit group in Vietnam; Ashok, a business student in India; and Alfreda, a
student in the U.S. planning to visit her home town in Ethiopia for two months in a few months.
You will hold most meetings virtually, but you can meet face-to-face with Bobby and Dr. K. as
needed. You have all known each other for at least a year and are excited to make this project a
success.
You and your team members will do the work part-time while you finish school or work at
other jobs, but you can use up to $50,000 total to pay yourselves. You estimate that you will need
another $30,000 for travel expenses, $20,000 for hardware and software, and the other $20,000
will go toward organizing events, consultants, legal/business fees, etc.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
217
Project Scope Management
Your goal is to develop a fully functioning website and test it by holding four events in four
different countries. You'll make improvements to the site after those events, develop plans to
scale it up, and recommend how to transition the project results into a successful business.
Recall from Chapter 4 that this system would include the following capabilities:
r
Provide guidelines and templates for running a shark tank type event
r
Accept donations from potential investors targeted toward specific schools or organizations
wishing to host an event (similar to the popular DonorsChoose.org site, where people can
fund teachers' requests)
r
Accept ideas for needed new products or services
r
Provide the ability for organizations to create their own custom site to solicit local partici-
pants and sharks, accept applications, and promote the winners as well as losers.
Note that you decided not to include the idea of providing an online version of the event as part
of the initial project as your sponsor and team decided that physical events would be most ef-
fective. You have also decided to limit the scope of this first project to provide the ability for 20
organizations to create their own custom websites. Your team members will screen the organiza-
tions and assist people in using the site to plan their events.
You plan to hold four shark tank like events within four months, using your team members
abroad to help organize and run those events, plus one at your college. Your semester has just
started, so you plan to hold your event at the end of the term. The project will fund refreshments
for the events and prizes for the winners, with a budget of $1,000 for each event. You don't think
you'll get any donations via the new website before these events, but you'll try to have it set up to
accept donations by the last month.
You will create some short videos to show people how to use the site and provide sugges-
tions for holding the events.
After testing the site and getting customer feedback, you will make some changes and docu-
ment recommendations for a follow-on project. You will also create a business plan recommend-
ing how to transition this project into a real business that can make a profit after two years.
Assume that you would pay for a new website and account through an online provider. Bobby
would do most of the customization/programming for the site, but you would consider outsourcing
or purchasing services to provide some of the capabilities like accepting donations and developing
the short videos on the site. You would also buy a new laptop and Internet access for your three
team members abroad so that they could share information with their contacts in those countries.
You and Dr. K. want to attend all of the events as part of the project, and you might include a
full face-to-face meeting with the whole team if possible.
Tasks
1. Document your approach for collecting requirements for the project. Include at least five
technical requirements and five non-technical requirements in a requirements traceability
matrix. Also develop a list of at least five questions you would like to ask the project sponsor.
Let your instructor answer them for you, if applicable.
2. Develop a first version of a project scope statement for the project. Use the template pro-
vided on the companion website for this text and the example in Chapter 3 as guides. Be as
specific as possible in describing product characteristics and requirements, as well as all of
the project's deliverables. Be sure to include the Global Treps website, four shark tank like
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
218
Chapter 5
events, a business plan, and outsourced items (laptops, donation acceptance, video cre-
ation, etc.) as part of the project scope.
3. Develop a work breakdown structure for the project. Break down the work to Level 3 or Level 4,
as appropriate. Use the template on the companion website and samples in this text as guides.
Print the WBS in list form. Be sure the WBS is based on the project charter (created for the
Chapter 4 Running Case), the project scope statement created in Task 2 above, and other
relevant information.
4. Use the WBS you developed in Task 3 to begin creating a Gantt chart using your choice of
software. Do not enter any durations or dependencies. Print the resulting Gantt chart on one
page, and be sure to display the entire Task Name column.
5. Develop a strategy for scope validation and change control for this project. Write a short
paper summarizing key points of the strategy.
Key Terms
analogy approach p.200
benchmarking p.189
bottom-up approach p.201
decomposition p.194
deliverable p.184
Joint Application Design (JAD) p.209
project scope management p.184
project scope statement p.191
prototyping p.209
requirement p.186
requirements management plan p.187
requirements traceability matrix (RTM) p.191
scope p.184
scope baseline p.194
scope creep p.205
scope validation p.206
top-down approach p.201
use case modeling p.209
variance p.208
WBS dictionary p.203
work breakdown structure (WBS) p.194
work package p.196
End Notes

1 Karl Wiegers, Software Requirements, Second edition (Redmond, WA: Microsoft Press, 2003), p. 7.

2 Amy Hillman, "The Rise in Business-Analytics Degrees," Huffington Post (May 13, 2014).

3 Project Management Institute, Pulse of the Profession: Requirements Management
( August 2014).

4 Craig Smith, "Interview and Book Review: How Google Tests Software," InfoQ.com
(September 11, 2012).

5 John Simpson, "2011: The State of Requirements Management" (2011).

6 Project Management Institute, Pulse of the Profession: Requirements Management -
A Core Competency for Project and Program Success (August 2014).

7 This structure is based on a sample Project 98 file. See www.microsoft.com for additional
template files.

8 Mindjet Visual Thinking, "About Mind Maps," Mindjet.com (2002).
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
219
Project Scope Management

9 David I. Cleland, Project Management: Strategic Design and Implementation, Second edition
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994).

10 Geoffrey James, "Information Technology Fiascoes ... and How to Avoid Them," Datamation
(November 1997).

11 Paul McDougall, "8 Expensive IT Blunders," InformationWeek (October 16, 2006).

12 Geoffrey James, "Information Technology Fiascoes ... and How to Avoid Them," Datamation
(November 1997).

13 Marc L. Songini, "21st Century Insurance Apps in Limbo Despite $100M Investment,"
Computerworld (December 6, 2002).

14 www.myki.com.au/About-myki/What-is-myki (accessed March 1, 2012).

15 Megan Levy, "Peak-Hour Test for myki Smartcard System," The Age (July 26, 2010).

16 Greg Thom, "When It Comes to myki, Like It or Lump It," Herald Sun (January 20, 2012).

17 Alex White, "The $1.5 Billion myki Debacle Labor Doesn't Want to Know About," Herald Sun
(January 3, 2015).

18 Andy Crowe, Alpha Project Managers: What the Top 2% Know That Everyone Else Does
Not (Kennesaw, GA: Velociteach Press, 2006), pp. 46-47.

19 Julia King, "IS Reins in Runaway Projects," Computerworld (September 24, 1997).

20 Thomas E. Murphy, "Market Guide for Software Requirements Definition and Management
Solutions," Gartner (October 7, 2014).
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.