Information
Technology
Management
Project
Schwalbe
9th Edition
I n f o r m at I o n t e c h n o l o g y
P r o j e c t m a n a g e m e n t
Ninth Edition
Kathy Schwalbe, Ph.D., PMP
Professor Emeritus, Augsburg College
Australia Brazil Mexico Singapore United Kingdom United States
2019, 2016 Cengage Learning, Inc.
WCN: 01-100-101
Information Technology Project
Management, Ninth Edition
Kathy Schwalbe
SVP, GM Skills & Global Product
Management: Jonathan Lau
Product Team Manager: Kristin McNary
Product Manager: Jaymie Falconi
Product Assistant: Anna Goulart
Executive Director, Content Design:
Mara Bellegarde
Director, Learning Design: Leigh Hefferon
Learning Designer: Maria Garguilo
Vice President, Strategic Marketing
Services: Jennifer Ann Baker
Marketing Director: Sean Chamberland
Marketing Manager: Scott Chrysler
Director, Content Delivery: Patty Stephan
Content Manager: Michele Stulga
Development Editor: Ann Shaffer
Tech Editor: John Freitas
Digital Delivery Lead: Noah Vincelette
Senior Designer: Diana Graham
Production Service/Composition:
SPi Global
Cover image: rendixalextian/iStock/Getty
Images
For product information and technology assistance, contact
Cengage Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706.
For permission to use material from this text or product, submit all
requests online at cengage.com/permissions
Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to
permissionrequest@cengage.com
Library of Congress Control Number: 2018944898
Student Edition:
ISBN-13: 978-1-337-10135-6
Cengage
20 Channel Center Street
Boston, MA 02210
USA
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright
herein may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form or by
any means-graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited
to photocopying, recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, web distribution,
information networks, or information storage and retrieval systems, except
as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright
Act-without the prior written permission of the publisher.
Screenshots for this book were created using Microsoft Project, and were used with permission from Microsoft.
Microsoft and the Office logo are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the United States and/or other
countries. Cengage Learning is an independent entity from the Microsoft Corporation, and not affiliated with Microsoft in any manner.
Screenshots from MindView Business software are used with permission from MatchWare. iPhone, iPad, iPod, and MacBook are
registered trademarks of Apple Inc.
Information pertaining to Northwest Airlines was used with their express permission. No part of it may be reproduced or used in any
form without prior written permission from Cengage.
This publication is a derivative work of A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide) - Sixth Edition, which is
copyrighted material of and owned by Project Management Institute, Inc. (PMI), Copyright 2017. This publication has been developed
and reproduced with the permission of PMI. Unauthorized reproduction of this material is strictly prohibited. The derivative work is
the copyrighted material of and owned by Cengage, Copyright 2019.
Sections in the text marked with an asterisk and Appendix A are used with permission from Schwalbe Publishing, Minneapolis, MN.
PMI, PMI Talent Triangle, PMP, CAPM, PgMP, PMI-RMP, PMI-ACP, PMI-SP, OPM3, and PMBOK are registered marks of the Project
Management Institute, Inc.
Cengage is a leading provider of customized learning solutions with employees residing in nearly 40 different countries and sales in
more than 125 countries around the world. Find your local representative at www.cengage.com.
Cengage products are represented in Canada by Nelson Education, Ltd.
To learn more about Cengage platforms and services, register or access your online learning solution, or purchase materials for your
course, visit www.cengage.com.
Printed in the United States of America
Print Number: 01        Print Year: 2018
For Dan, Anne, Bobby, and Scott
Preface
xv
About the Author
xxiv
Chapter 1
Introduction to Project Management
1
Chapter 2
The Project Management and Information Technology Context
47
Chapter 3
The Project Management Process Groups
85
Chapter 4
Project Integration Management
151
Chapter 5
Project Scope Management
201
Chapter 6
Project Schedule Management
241
Chapter 7
Project Cost Management
285
Chapter 8
Project Quality Management
327
Chapter 9
Project Resource Management
373
Chapter 10
Project Communications Management
425
Chapter 11
Project Risk Management
463
Chapter 12
Project Procurement Management
505
Chapter 13
Project Stakeholder Management
539
Glossary
G.1
Index
I.1
BRIEF CONTENTS
Preface
xv
About the Author
xxiv
Chapter 1  Introduction to Project Management
1
Introduction
2
What Is a Project?
4
Examples of IT Projects
4
Project Attributes
6
Project Constraints
7
What Is Project Management?
9
Project Stakeholders
9
Project Management Knowledge Areas
11
Project Management Tools and Techniques
12
Project Success
15
Program and Project Portfolio Management
18
Programs
18
Project Portfolio Management
19
Organizational Project Management
21
The Role of the Project Manager
24
Project Manager Job Description
24
Suggested Skills for Project Managers
26
PMI Talent Triangle and the Importance of Leadership Skills
28
Careers for IT Project Managers
30
The Project Management Profession
30
History of Project Management
30
The Project Management Institute
34
Project Management Certification
35
Ethics in Project Management
36
Project Management Software
37
Chapter Summary
40
Discussion Questions
41
Quick Quiz
41
Quick Quiz Answers
43
Exercises
43
Key Terms
44
Endnotes
45
Chapter 2  The Project Management and Information Technology Context
47
A Systems View of Project Management
49
What Is a Systems Approach?
49
The Three-Sphere Model for Systems Management
50
TABLE OF CONTENTS
vi
Table of Contents
Understanding Organizations
51
The Four Frames of Organizations
51
Organizational Structures
53
Organizational Culture
57
Focusing on Stakeholder Needs
58
The Importance of Top Management Commitment
60
The Need for Organizational Commitment to Information Technology
61
The Need for Organizational Standards
62
Project and Product Life Cycles
62
Project Life Cycle
63
Product Life Cycles
63
The Importance of Project Phases and Management Reviews
66
The Context of Information Technology Projects
67
The Nature of IT Projects
67
Characteristics of IT Project Team Members
68
Diverse Technologies
68
Recent Trends Affecting Information Technology Project Management
69
Globalization
69
Outsourcing
70
Virtual Teams
71
Agile
73
The Manifesto for Agile Software Development
73
Scrum
74
Agile, the PMBOK Guide, and a New Certification
75
Chapter Summary
77
Discussion Questions
78
Quick Quiz
78
Quick Quiz Answers
80
Exercises
80
Key Terms
81
Endnotes
82
Chapter 3  The Project Management Process Groups
85
Project Management Process Groups
86
Mapping the Process Groups to the Knowledge Areas
91
Developing an IT Project Management Methodology
93
Case Study 1: JWD Consulting's Project Management Intranet Site Project
(Predictive Approach)
95
Project Pre-Initiation and Initiation
96
Pre-Initiation Tasks
96
Initiating
101
Identifying Project Stakeholders
101
Drafting the Project Charter
103
Holding a Project Kick-Off Meeting
105
Project Planning
106
Project Execution
117
vii
Table of Contents
Project Monitoring and Controlling
122
Project Closing
126
Case Study 2: JWD Consulting's Project Management Intranet Site Project
(Agile Approach)
129
Scrum Roles, Artifacts, and Ceremonies
130
Project Pre-Initiation and Initiation
133
Planning
134
Executing
136
Monitoring and Controlling
137
Closing
138
Templates by Process Group
139
Chapter Summary
144
Discussion Questions
145
Quick Quiz
145
Quick Quiz Answers
147
Exercises
147
Key Terms
148
Endnotes
148
Chapter 4  Project Integration Management
151
What Is Project Integration Management?
152
Strategic Planning and Project Selection
155
Strategic Planning
156
Identifying Potential Projects
157
Aligning IT with Business Strategy
158
Methods for Selecting Projects
160
Focusing on Broad Organizational Needs
160
Categorizing IT Projects
161
Performing Financial Analyses
162
Net Present Value Analysis
162
Return on Investment
165
Payback Analysis
166
Using a Weighted Scoring Model
167
Implementing a Balanced Scorecard
169
Developing a Project Charter
169
Developing a Project Management Plan
173
Project Management Plan Contents
174
Using Guidelines to Create Project Management Plans
176
Directing and Managing Project Work
177
Coordinating Planning and Execution
178
Providing Strong Leadership and a Supportive Culture
178
Capitalizing on Product, Business, and Application Area Knowledge
179
Project Execution Tools and Techniques
180
Managing Project Knowledge
181
Monitoring and Controlling Project Work
182
Performing Integrated Change Control
184
viii
Table of Contents
Change Control on IT Projects
185
Change Control System
185
Closing Projects or Phases
188
Using Software to Assist in Project Integration Management
189
Considerations for Agile/Adaptive Environments
190
Chapter Summary
192
Discussion Questions
193
Quick Quiz
193
Quick Quiz Answers
194
Exercises
195
Running Case
196
Tasks
197
Key Terms
198
Endnotes
199
Chapter 5  Project Scope Management
201
What Is Project Scope Management?
202
Planning Scope Management
203
Collecting Requirements
206
Defining Scope
209
Creating the Work Breakdown Structure
213
Approaches to Developing Work Breakdown Structures
218
Using Guidelines
219
The Analogy Approach
219
The Top-Down and Bottom-Up Approaches
220
Mind Mapping
221
The WBS Dictionary
223
Advice for Creating a WBS and a WBS Dictionary
224
Validating Scope
224
Controlling Scope
227
Suggestions for Improving User Input
228
Suggestions for Reducing Incomplete and
Changing Requirements
229
Using Software to Assist in Project Scope Management
230
Considerations for Agile/Adaptive Environments
231
Chapter Summary
233
Discussion Questions
233
Quick Quiz
234
Quick Quiz Answers
235
Exercises
236
Running Case
237
Tasks
238
Key Terms
239
Endnotes
239
ix
Table of Contents
Chapter 6  Project Schedule Management
241
The Importance of Project Schedules
242
Planning Schedule Management
244
Defining Activities
246
Sequencing Activities
248
Dependencies
248
Network Diagrams
249
Estimating Activity Durations
253
Developing the Schedule
254
Gantt Charts
255
Adding Milestones to Gantt Charts
257
Using Tracking Gantt Charts to Compare Planned and Actual Dates
258
Critical Path Method
259
Calculating the Critical Path
259
Growing Grass Can Be on the Critical Path
261
Using Critical Path Analysis to Make Schedule Trade-Offs
261
Using the Critical Path to Shorten a Project Schedule
263
Importance of Updating Critical Path Data
265
Critical Chain Scheduling
265
Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT)
268
Agile and Schedule Management
269
Controlling the Schedule
270
Reality Checks on Scheduling and the Need for Discipline
271
Using Software to Assist in Project Schedule Management
272
Words of Caution on Using Project Management Software
273
Considerations for Agile/Adaptive Environments
274
Chapter Summary
276
Discussion Questions
277
Quick Quiz
278
Quick Quiz Answers
279
Exercises
279
Running Case
282
Tasks
282
Key Terms
282
Endnotes
283
Chapter 7  Project Cost Management
285
The Importance of Project Cost Management
286
What Is Cost?
287
What Is Project Cost Management?
288
Basic Principles of Cost Management
288
Planning Cost Management
294
Estimating Costs
294
Types of Cost Estimates
295
x
Table of Contents
Cost Estimation Tools and Techniques
296
Typical Problems with IT Cost Estimates
298
How to Develop a Cost Estimate and Basis of Estimates
299
Determining the Budget
305
Controlling Costs
306
Earned Value Management
307
Project Portfolio Management
312
Using Project Management Software to Assist in Project Cost Management
314
Considerations for Agile/Adaptive Environments
315
Chapter Summary
317
Discussion Questions
317
Quick Quiz
318
Quick Quiz Answers
320
Exercises
320
Running Case
321
Tasks
321
Key Terms
323
Endnotes
323
Chapter 8  Project Quality Management
327
The Importance of Project Quality Management
328
What Is Project Quality Management?
330
Planning Quality Management
331
Managing Quality
334
Controlling Quality
335
Tools and Techniques for Quality Control
336
Statistical Sampling
342
Six Sigma
344
How Is Six Sigma Quality Control Unique?
345
Six Sigma and Project Selection and Management
346
Six Sigma and Statistics
346
Testing
348
Modern Quality Management
351
Deming and His 14 Points for Management
351
Juran and the Importance of Top Management Commitment to Quality
352
Crosby and Striving for Zero Defects
352
Ishikawa's Guide to Quality Control
353
Taguchi and Robust Design Methods
353
Feigenbaum and Workers' Responsibility for Quality
354
Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award
354
ISO Standards
354
Improving IT Project Quality
355
Leadership
356
The Cost of Quality
356
xi
Table of Contents
The Impact of Organizational Influences, and Workplace Factors on Quality
358
Expectations and Cultural Differences in Quality
359
Maturity Models
359
Software Quality Function Deployment Model
360
Capability Maturity Model Integration
360
Project Management Maturity Models
361
Using Software to Assist in Project Quality Management
362
Considerations for Agile/Adaptive Environments
363
Chapter Summary
365
Discussion Questions
365
Quick Quiz
366
Quick Quiz Answers
368
Exercises
368
Running Case
369
Tasks
369
Key Terms
370
Endnotes
371
Chapter 9  Project Resource Management
373
The Importance of Resource Management
374
The Global IT Workforce
374
Implications for the Future of IT Human Resource
Management
375
What Is Project Resource Management?
377
Keys to Managing and Leading People
378
Motivation Theories
378
Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs
380
Herzberg's Motivation-Hygiene Theory
381
McClelland's Acquired-Needs Theory
383
McGregor's Theory X and Theory Y
383
Influence and Power
384
Covey and Improving Effectiveness
386
Emotional Intelligence
389
Leadership
390
Developing the Resource Management Plan and Team Charter
391
Project Organizational Charts
392
Responsibility Assignment Matrices
394
Staffing Management Plans and Resource Histograms
395
Team Charters
395
Estimating Activity Resources
396
Acquiring Resources
397
Resource Assignment
398
Resource Loading
399
Resource Leveling
401
xii
Table of Contents
Developing the Project Team
403
Training
403
Team-Building Activities
404
The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator
405
The Social Styles Profile
406
DISC Profile
407
Reward and Recognition Systems
408
Managing the Project Team
409
Tools and Techniques for Managing Project Teams
409
General Advice on Managing Teams
411
Controlling Resources
412
Using Software to Assist in Resource Management
412
Considerations for Agile/Adaptive Environments
413
Chapter Summary
415
Discussion Questions
416
Quick Quiz
417
Quick Quiz Answers
418
Exercises
419
Running Case
420
Key Terms
421
Endnotes
421
Chapter 10  Project Communications Management
425
The Importance of Project Communications Management
426
Keys to Good Communications
428
Focusing on Group and Individual Communication Needs
428
Formal and Informal Methods for Communicating
430
Distributing Important Information in an Effective and Timely Manner
431
Setting the Stage for Communicating Bad News
431
Determining the Number of Communication Channels
432
Planning Communications Management
434
Managing Communications
436
Using Technology to Enhance Information Creation and Distribution
436
Selecting the Appropriate Communication Methods and Media
437
Reporting Performance
440
Monitoring Communications
441
Suggestions for Improving Project Communications
442
Developing Better Communication Skills
442
Running Effective Meetings
443
Using E-Mail, Instant Messaging, Texting, Kanban Boards,
and Collaborative Tools Effectively
445
Using Templates for Project Communications
448
Using Software to Assist in Project Communications
452
Considerations for Agile/Adaptive Environments
454
Chapter Summary
456
Discussion Questions
456
xiii
Table of Contents
Quick Quiz
457
Quick Quiz Answers
459
Exercises
459
Running Case
460
Key Terms
461
Endnotes
461
Chapter 11  Project Risk Management
463
The Importance of Project Risk Management
464
Planning Risk Management
472
Common Sources of Risk on IT Projects
474
Identifying Risks
477
Suggestions for Identifying Risks
477
The Risk Register
478
The Risk Report
480
Performing Qualitative Risk Analysis
481
Using Probability/Impact Matrixes to Calculate Risk Factors
481
Top Ten Risk Item Tracking
483
Performing Quantitative Risk Analysis
485
Decision Trees and Expected Monetary Value
485
Simulation
487
Sensitivity Analysis
489
Planning Risk Responses
490
Implementing Risk Responses
493
Monitoring Risks
493
Using Software to Assist in Project Risk Management
494
Considerations for Agile/Adaptive Environments
494
Chapter Summary
496
Discussion Questions
497
Quick Quiz
498
Quick Quiz Answers
499
Exercises
499
Running Case
501
Key Terms
501
Endnotes
502
Chapter 12  Project Procurement Management
505
The Importance of Project Procurement Management
506
Planning Procurement Management
512
Types of Contracts
512
Tools and Techniques for Planning Procurement Management
516
Make-or-Buy Analysis
516
Expert Judgment
517
Market Research
518
Procurement Management Plan
518
Statement of Work
518
xiv
Table of Contents
Procurement or Bid Documents
519
Examples from a Real RFP
521
Source Selection Criteria
524
Conducting Procurements
525
Controlling Procurements
527
Using Software to Assist in Project Procurement Management
529
Considerations for Agile/Adaptive Environments
531
Chapter Summary
533
Discussion Questions
534
Quick Quiz
534
Quick Quiz Answers
536
Exercises
536
Running Case
537
Key Terms
537
Endnotes
538
Chapter 13  Project Stakeholder Management
539
The Importance of Project Stakeholder Management
540
Identifying Stakeholders
542
Planning Stakeholder Engagement
546
Managing Stakeholder Engagement
548
Monitoring Stakeholder Engagement
550
Using Software to Assist in Project Stakeholder Management
553
Considerations for Agile/Adaptive Environments
554
Chapter Summary
556
Discussion Questions
556
Quick Quiz
557
Quick Quiz Answers
558
Exercises
558
Running Case
559
Key Terms
560
Endnotes
560
Glossary
G.1
Index
I.1
Preface
The future of many organizations depends on their ability to harness the power of
information technology, and good project managers continue to be in high demand.
Colleges have responded to this need by establishing courses in project management
and making them part of the information technology, management, engineering, and
other curricula. Corporations are investing in continuing education to help develop and
deepen the effectiveness of project managers and project teams. This text provides a
much-needed framework for teaching courses in project management, especially those
that emphasize managing information technology projects. The first eight editions of
this text were extremely well received by people in academia and the workplace. The
Ninth Edition builds on the strengths of the previous editions and adds new, important
information and features.
It's impossible to read a newspaper, magazine, or web page without hearing about the
impact of information technology on our society. Information is traveling faster and being
shared by more people than ever before. You can buy just about anything online, surf
the web on a mobile phone, or use a wireless Internet connection just about anywhere.
Companies have linked their systems together to help them fill orders on time and better
serve their customers. Software companies are continually developing new products to
help streamline our work and get better results. When technology works well, it is almost
invisible. But did it ever occur to you to ask, "Who makes these complex technologies and
systems happen?"
Because you're reading this text, you must have an interest in the "behind-the-scenes"
aspects of technology. If I've done my job well, you'll begin to see the many innovations
society is currently enjoying as the result of thousands of successful information
technology projects. In this text, you'll read about IT projects in organizations around the
world that went well, including the National University Hospital in Singapore, which used
critical chain scheduling to decrease patient admission times by more than 50 percent;
retailer Zulily, one of a growing number of organizations developing software in-house to
meet their need for speed and innovation; Dell's green computing project that saves energy
and millions of dollars; Google's driverless car project, striving to reduce traffic accidents
and save lives; and many more.
Of course, not all projects are successful. Factors such as time, money, and unrealis-
tic expectations, among many others, can sabotage a promising effort if it is not properly
managed. In this text, you'll also learn from the mistakes made on many projects that
were not successful.
I have written this book in an effort to educate you, tomorrow's project managers,
about what will help make a project succeed-and what can make it fail. You'll also see
how projects are used in everyday media, such as television and film, and how companies
use best practices in project management. Many readers tell me how much they enjoy
reading these real-world examples in the What Went Right?, What Went Wrong?, Media
Snapshot, Global Issues, and Best Practice features. As practitioners know, there is no
xvi
Preface
"one size fits all" solution to managing projects. By seeing how different organizations in
different industries successfully implement project management, you can help your orga-
nization do the same.
Although project management has been an established field for many years, managing
information technology projects requires ideas and information that go beyond standard
practices. For example, many information technology projects fail because of a lack of
executive support, poor user involvement, and unclear business objectives. This book
includes many suggestions for dealing with these issues. New technologies can also aid
in managing information technology projects, and examples of using software to assist in
project management are included throughout the book.
Information Technology Project Management, Ninth Edition, is the only textbook
to apply all ten project management knowledge areas and all five process groups to
information technology projects. As you will learn, the project management knowledge
areas are project integration, scope, time, cost, quality, human resource, communications,
risk, procurement, and stakeholder management. The five process groups are initiating,
planning, executing, monitoring and controlling, and closing.
This text builds on the PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition, an American National Stan-
dard, to provide a solid framework and context for managing information technology
projects.
In addition to the physical text, several resources are available online. Appendix A,
Guide to Using Microsoft Project 2016, is provided online. When a new version of the
software is released, a new appendix will be available. Additional case studies, including
the one from the Seventh Edition, Manage Your Health, are available, as well as over fifty
template files that students can use to create their own project management documents.
The author's personal website (www.kathyschwalbe.com or www.pmtexts.com) also pro-
vides additional, up-to-date resources and links related to the field of project management,
including topics like Agile, PMP and CAPM certification, simulation software, leadership,
mind mapping, sample student projects, and more.
Information Technology Project Management, Ninth Edition, provides practical les-
sons in project management for students and practitioners alike. By weaving together
theory and practice, this text presents an understandable, integrated view of the many
concepts, skills, tools, and techniques of information technology project management. The
comprehensive design of the text provides a strong foundation for students and practitio-
ners in project management.
New to the Ninth Edition
Building on the success of previous editions, Information Technology Project Management,
Ninth Edition introduces a uniquely effective combination of features. The main changes in
the Ninth Edition include the following:
Many updates based on the PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition.

A new section in chapters 4-13 called "Considerations for Agile/Adaptive
Environments."

A new feature called "Advice for Young Professionals."

Updated and additional exercises to enhance student learning and give
instructors more options for in-class or out-of-class work.
xvii
Preface

Additional content on important topics like leadership and agile.

New examples that highlight IT project management at work in real,
newsworthy companies. These timely, relevant examples help illustrate the
realworld applications and impact of key project management concepts. They
also serve as mini-case stories, suitable for class discussion.

Many recent studies of IT project management and related topics. Summaries
of classic, updated, and the most current research throughout the text build a
rich context for essential IT project management concepts.

User feedback is incorporated. Based on feedback from reviewers, students,
instructors, practitioners, and translators, you'll see a variety of changes that
help clarify information.
Many people have been practicing some form of project management with little or
no formal study in this area. New books and articles are written each year as we discover
more about the field and as project management software continues to advance. Because
the project management field and the technology industry change rapidly, you cannot
assume that what worked even a few years ago is still the best approach today. This text
provides up-to-date information on how good project management and effective use
of software can help you manage projects, especially information technology projects.
Distinct features of this text include its relationship to the Project Management Body of
Knowledge, its value in preparing for certification, its detailed guide for using Microsoft
Project 2016, its inclusion of running case studies and online templates, its emphasis on
IT projects, its coverage of several software tools that assist with project management, and
its Companion website.
Based on PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition and Preparing for Certification
The Project Management Institute (PMI) created the Guide to the Project Management
Body of Knowledge (the PMBOK Guide) as a framework and starting point for
understanding project management. It includes an introduction to project management,
brief descriptions of all 10 project management knowledge areas, and a glossary of terms.
The PMBOK Guide is, however, just that-a guide. This text uses the PMBOK Guide -
Sixth Edition (2017) as a foundation, but goes beyond it by providing more details,
discussing the how and why of the knowledge areas, highlighting additional topics, and
providing a real-world context for IT project management. This text is an excellent
resource for preparing for PMI certifications, such as the Project Management Professional
(PMP) and Certified Associate in Project Management (CAPM).
Detailed Guide to Microsoft Project 2016
Software has become a critical tool for helping project managers and their teams
effectively manage information technology projects. Information Technology Project
Management, Ninth Edition, includes a detailed guide in Appendix A (available on the
Companion website for this text) for using the leading project management software on
the market-Microsoft Project 2016. Examples that use Project 2016 and other software
tools are integrated throughout the text. Appendix A, Guide to Using Microsoft Project
2016, teaches you in a systematic way to use this powerful software to help in project
scope, schedule, cost, resource, and communications management.
xviii
Preface
Emphasis on IT Projects and Use of Software Tools
Most of the examples of projects in this text are based on IT projects. Research studies and
advice are specific to managing IT projects, and include expanded information on agile. Each
of the knowledge area chapters includes examples as well as a separate section describing
how software can be used to assist in managing that knowledge area. For example, Chapter 5,
Project Scope Management, includes examples of using mind maps created with MindView
software to create a work breakdown structure. Chapter 11, Project Risk Management, shows
an example of using Monte Carlo simulation software to help quantify project risk.
Exercises, Running Cases, Templates, and Sample Documents
Based on feedback from readers, the Ninth Edition continues to provide challenging exer-
cises and running cases to help students apply concepts in each chapter. The text includes
more than 50 templates and examples of real project documents that students can use to
help them apply their skills to their own projects.
Students can access all of these materials for free through
A c c e s i n g M i n d T a p
To access the IT Project Management MindTap, open a browser and go to www.cengage
.com. Click Sign In to navigate to the login page. Click Create an Account to begin the
registration process. You will need the course link, access code, or course key to register
your product.
Organization and Content
Information Technology Project Management, Ninth Edition, is organized into three main
sections, which provide a framework for project management, a detailed description of each
project management knowledge area, and an appendix of practical information for applying
project management. The first three chapters form the first section, which introduces
the project management framework and sets the stage for the remaining chapters.
Chapters 4 through 13 form the second section, which describes each of the project
management knowledge areas-project integration, scope, schedule, cost, quality,
resource, communications, risk, procurement, and stakeholder management-in the
context of information technology projects. An entire chapter is dedicated to each
knowledge area. Each of these chapters includes sections that map to their major
processes as described in the PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition. For example, the chapter
on project quality management includes sections on planning quality management,
managing quality, and controlling quality. Additional sections highlight other important
concepts related to each knowledge area, such as Six Sigma, testing, maturity models,
and using software to assist in project quality management. Each chapter also includes
detailed examples of key project management tools and techniques as applied to
information technology projects. For example, the chapter on project integration
management includes samples of various project-selection techniques, such as net present
value analyses, ROI calculations, payback analyses, and weighted scoring models. The
project scope management chapter includes a sample project charter, a project scope
statement, and several work breakdown structures for information technology projects.
xix
Preface
Appendix A, provided online to keep it up-to-date, forms the third section of the
text, which provides practical information to help you learn how to use the most popular
project management software available today. By following the detailed, step-by-step guide
in Appendix A, which includes more than 60 screen illustrations, you will learn how to use
Project 2016. You can download a free trial from the Microsoft website, use your school or
company license, or purchase this powerful software.
Pedagogical Features
Several pedagogical features are included in this text to enhance presentation of
the materials so that you can more easily understand the concepts and apply them.
Throughout the text, emphasis is placed on applying concepts to current, real-world
information technology project management.
Opening Case and Case Wrap-Up
To set the stage, each chapter begins with an opening case related to the material
presented in that chapter. These real-life case scenarios, most of which are based on the
author's experiences, spark student interest and introduce important concepts in a real-
world context. As project management concepts and techniques are discussed, they are
applied to the opening case and other similar scenarios. Each chapter then closes with a
case wrap-up-with some ending successfully and some failing-to further illustrate the
real world of project management.
What Went Right? and What Went Wrong?
Failures, as much as successes, can be valuable learning experiences. Each chapter of
the text includes one or more examples of real information technology projects that went
right, as well as examples of projects that went wrong. These examples further illustrate
the importance of mastering key concepts in each chapter.
Media Snapshot
The world is full of projects. Television shows, movies, newspapers, websites, and other
media highlight project results that are good and bad. Relating project management
concepts to the types of projects highlighted in the media helps you understand
the importance of this growing field. Why not get excited about studying project
management by seeing its concepts at work in popular television shows, movies, or
other media?
Best Practice
Every chapter includes an example of a best practice related to topics in that chapter.
For example, Chapter 1 describes best practices written by Robert Butrick, author of
The Project Workout, from the Ultimate Business Library's Best Practice book. He
instructs organizations to ensure that their projects are driven by their strategy and to
engage project stakeholders.
xx
Preface
Global Issues
Every chapter includes an example of global issues of importance today. For example,
Chapter 2 describes some of the problems with outsourcing, such as rioting in Beijing
when customers could not buy the latest iPhones. Chapter 12 describes the recent
development of urban onshoring, one response to problems with offshoring.
Advice for Young Professionals
A new feature in each chapter provides practical advice as you begin your career in
IT and/or project management. For example, Chapter 1 provides insight to help you
determine if you should pursue a career as a project manager.
Key Terms
The fields of information technology and project management include many unique terms
that are vital to creating a workable language when the two fields are combined. Key terms
are displayed in boldface and are defined the first time they appear. A list of key terms is
provided in alphabetical order at the end of each chapter and a glossary is provided on the
Companion web site for text.
Application Software
Learning becomes much more dynamic with hands-on practice using the top project
management software tool in the industry, Microsoft Project 2016, as well as other tools,
such as spreadsheet software and the Internet. Each chapter offers many opportunities to get
hands-on experience and build new software skills. This text is written from the point of view
that reading about something only gets you so far-to really understand project management,
you have to do it for yourself. In addition to the exercises and running cases at the end of
each chapter, several challenging exercises are provided at the end of Appendix A, Guide to
Using Microsoft Project 2016.
Student and Instructor Resources
Student and Instructor Companion Websites
The free Student Companion Website accessed through www.cengage.com provides
the template files mentioned in the text, Project 2016 files, a case study describing
initiating through closing the ResNet project for Northwest Airlines (now part of Delta),
and additional running cases that instructors can assign to students to practice their
skills. There is also a link to the author's website, which provides up-to-date resources on
important topics like agile, certifications, and more.
The Instructor Companion Website, also accessed with a single sign-on (SSO) account
through www.cengage.com, contains even more resources only for instructors:

Instructor's Manual The Instructor's Manual that accompanies this textbook
includes additional instructional material to assist in class preparation, such
as suggestions for lecture topics and additional discussion questions.

Solution Files Solutions to end-of-chapter questions are available on the
Instructor Companion Website.
xxi
Preface

PowerPoint Presentations This text comes with Microsoft PowerPoint slides
for each chapter. These slides are included as a teaching aid for classroom
presentation, to make available to students on the network for chapter
review, or to print for classroom distribution. Instructors can add their own
slides for additional topics they introduce to the class.

Test Banks In addition to the Test Bank available online through Cognero
(see below), the Test Bank is also available in a number of file formats on the
Instructor Companion Website. Each chapter's bank of questions includes
dozens of True/False, Multiple Choice, and Essay questions. Instructors can
retrieve the appropriate file formats to administer tests through their schools'
learning management systems (Blackboard, Canvas, Moodle, Desire2Learn,
etc.), or they can opt for Word documents.
Test Banks in Cognero
The Test Bank for Information Technology Project Management, Ninth Edition, is avail-
able online in the Cognero system. Cengage Learning Testing Powered by Cognero is a
flexible, online system that allows instructors to:

Author, edit, and manage test bank content.

Use searchable metadata to ensure tests are complete and compliant.

Create multiple test versions in an instant.

Deliver tests from your learning management system (LMS), classroom, or
wherever you want.
Cengage Learning Testing Powered by Cognero works on any operating system or browser
with no special installs or downloads needed. With its intuitive tools and familiar desktop
drop-down menus, Cognero enables instructors to easily create and edit tests from school
or home-anywhere with Internet access.
IT Project Management MindTap
MindTap for Information Technology Project Management, Ninth Edition is a personal-
ized, fully online, digital learning platform of content, assignments, and services that
­engages students and encourages them to think critically, while allowing instructors to
easily set their course through simple customization options.
MindTap is designed to help students master the skills they need in today's workforce.
Research shows employers need critical thinkers, troubleshooters, and creative problem
solvers to stay relevant in our fast paced, technology-driven world. MindTap helps you
achieve this with assignments and activities that provide hands-on practice, real-life rel-
evance, and certification test prep. Students are guided through assignments that help
them master basic knowledge and understanding before moving on to more challenging
problems.
MindTap is designed around learning objectives and provides the analytics and reporting
to easily see where the class stands in terms of progress, engagement, and completion rates.
Students can access eBook content in the MindTap Reader, which offers highlighting,
note-taking, search and audio, as well as mobile access. Learn more at www.cengage.com/
mindtap/.
xxii
Preface
A c k n o w l e d g m e n t s
I never would have taken on the project of writing this book, including all the prior editions,
without the help of many people. I thank the staff at Cengage, including Jaymie Falconi,
Michele Stulga, Maria Garguilo, Amber Hill, and Kathy Kucharek, for their dedication and hard
work in helping me produce this book and in doing such an excellent job of marketing it.
I thank my many colleagues and experts in the field who contributed information to
this book. Joseph W. Kestel, PMP, provided outstanding feedback on the agile informa-
tion in this text based on his personal experience in leading agile projects. David Jones,
Rachel Hollstadt, Cliff Sprague, Michael Branch, Barb Most, Jodi Curtis, Rita Mulcahy, Karen
Boucher, Bill Munroe, Tess Galati, Joan Knutson, Neal Whitten, Brenda Taylor, Quentin
Fleming, Jesse Freese, Nick Matteucci, Nick Erndt, Dragan Milosevic, Bob Borlink, Arvid
Lee, Kathy Christenson, Peeter Kivestu, and many other people provided excellent materi-
als included in this book. I enjoy the network of project managers, authors, and consul-
tants in this field who are passionate about improving the theory and practice of project
management.
I also thank my students and colleagues at Augsburg College and the University of
Minnesota for providing feedback on the earlier editions of this book. I received many
valuable comments from them on ways to improve the text and structure of my courses.
I learn something new about project management and teaching all the time by interacting
with students, faculty, and staff.
I also thank the faculty reviewers for providing excellent feedback for me in writing
this book over the years. I thank the many instructors and readers who have contacted me
directly with praise as well as suggestions for improving this text. I appreciate the feedback
and do my best to incorporate as much as I can. In particular, I'd like to thank the following:
Jody Allen, Mid-America Christian University
William Baker, Southern New Hampshire University
Tonya Barrier, Missouri State University
Kevin Daimi, University of Detroit Mercy
Antonio Drommi, University of Detroit Mercy
Roger Engle, Franklin University
Lisa Foster, Walsh College of Business & Accountancy
Esther Frankel, Santa Barbara City College
Guy Garrett, Gulf Coast State College
James Gibbs, Mount St. Joseph University
Christa Glassman, Buffalo State College
Thomas Haigh, University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee
Scott Hilberg, Towson University
Kay Hammond, Lindenwood University
Sam Hijazi, Saint Leo University
Henry Jackson, Schreiner University
Karen Johnson, Indiana University Northwest
Donna Karch, The College of St. Scholastica
Carol Kaszynski, Inver Hills Community College
Cyril Keiffer, Owens Community College
Thomas King, Pennsylvania State University
xxiii
Preface
Jeff Landry, University of South Alabama
Sang Joon Lee, Mississippi State University
Sunita Lodwig, University of South Florida
Max McQuighan, Anne Arundel Community College
Barbara Miller, Zane State College
Kimberly Mitchell, Illinois State University
Tim Moriarty, Waubonsee Community College
Brandon Olson, The College of St. Scholastica
Olga Petkova, Central Connecticut State University
April Reed, East Carolina University
Jason Riley, Sam Houston State University
Paula Ruby, Arkansas State University
Carl Scott, University of Houston
Ferris Sticksel, Webster University
David Syverson, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
Arthur Thomas, Syracuse University
Angela Trego, Utah Valley University
Barbara Warner, Wake Technical Community College
Steven White, Anne Arundel Community College
Dr. David Williamson, Colorado State University
Most of all, I am grateful to my family. Without their support, I never could have writ-
ten this book. My wonderful husband, Dan, has always supported me in my career, and he
helps me keep up-to-date with software development because he is a lead architect for Mil-
ner Technologies, Inc. (formerly ComSquared Systems, Inc.). Our three children, Anne,
Bobby, and Scott, think it's cool that their mom writes books and speaks at conferences.
They also see me managing projects all the time. Anne, now 34, a research analyst for The
New Teacher Project, teases me for being the only quilter she knows who treats each quilt
as a project. (Maybe that's why I get so many done!) After her colleagues at The Minne-
sota Evaluation Studies Institute at the University of Minnesota heard about my work and
books, they hired me to teach a workshop on project management to evaluators, which
was sold out. Our two sons are working as software developers and may become IT project
managers soon. Our children understand the main reason I write-I have a passion for
educating future leaders of the world, including them.
As always, I am eager to receive your feedback on this book. Please send comments to
me at schwalbe@augsburg.edu.
Kathy Schwalbe, Ph.D., PMP
Professor Emeritus, Department of Business Administration
Augsburg College
Kathy Schwalbe, Professor Emeritus in the Department
of Business Administration at Augsburg College in
Minneapolis, taught courses in project management,
problem solving for business, systems analysis and
design, information systems projects, and electronic
commerce until her retirement in May 2015. She retired
from teaching to focus on writing, traveling, and enjoying
life. Kathy was also an adjunct faculty member at the
University of Minnesota, where she taught a graduate-
level course in project management in the engineering
department. She also provides training and consulting services to several organizations
and speaks at numerous conferences. Kathy's first job out of college was as a project
manager in the Air Force. She worked for 10 years in industry before entering academia in
1991. She was an Air Force officer, project manager, systems analyst, senior engineer, and
information technology consultant. Kathy is an active member of PMI, having served as
the Student Chapter Liaison for the Minnesota chapter, VP of Education for the Minnesota
chapter, Editor of the ISSIG Review, Director of Communications for PMI's Information
Systems Specific Interest Group, member of PMI's test-writing team, and writer for
the community posts. Kathy earned her Ph.D. in Higher Education at the University of
Minnesota, her MBA at Northeastern University's High Technology MBA program, and her
B.S. in mathematics at the University of Notre Dame. She was named Educator of the Year
in 2011 by the Association of Information Technology Professionals (AITP) Education
Special Interest Group (EDSIG). Kathy lives in Minnesota with her husband. Visit her
personal website at www.kathyschwalbe.com or www.pmtexts.com.
Other books by Kathy Schwalbe:
An Introduction to Project Management, Sixth Edition (Minneapolis: Schwalbe
Publishing, 2017).
Healthcare Project Management, Second Edition, co-authored with Dan Furlong
(Minneapolis: Schwalbe Publishing, 2017).
About the Author
L e a r n i n g O b j e c t i v e s
After reading this chapter, you will be able to:

Articulate the growing need for better project management, especially for
information technology (IT) projects

Explain what a project is, provide examples of IT projects, list various
attributes of projects, and describe constraints of project management

Define project management and discuss key elements of the project
management framework, including project stakeholders, the project
management knowledge areas, common tools and techniques, and
project success

Discuss the relationship between project, program, and portfolio
management and the contributions each makes to enterprise success

Summarize the role of project managers by describing what they do,
what skills they need, the talent triangle, and career opportunities for IT
project managers

Recall key aspects of the project management profession, including
important components of its history, the role of professional organizations
like the Project Management Institute (PMI), the importance of certification
and ethics, and the advancement of project management software
C h a p t e r 1
Introduction to
Project Management
Chapter 1
2
Introduction
Many people and organizations today have a new-or renewed-interest in project
­management. Until the 1980s, project management primarily focused on providing
schedule and resource data to top management in the military, computer, and
construction industries. Today's project management involves much more, and people
in every industry and every country manage projects. Project management is a distinct
profession with degree programs, certifications, and excellent career opportunities.
New technologies have become a significant factor in many businesses. Computer
hardware, software, networks, and the use of interdisciplinary and global work teams
have radically changed the work environment. The following statistics demonstrate the
­significance of project management in today's society, especially for projects involving
information technology (IT):

Worldwide IT spending was $3.5 trillion in 2017, a 2.4 percent increase from
2016 spending. Communications services accounted for 40 percent of the
spending.1

The Project Management Institute reported that the number of project-
related jobs reached almost 66 million in 2017, and demand continues to
increase. "By 2027, employers will need 87.7 million individuals working in
project management-oriented roles."2
O p e n i n g C a s e
Anne Roberts, the director of the Project Management Office for Information Technology
at a large retail chain, stood in front of 500 people in the large corporate auditorium to
explain the company's new strategies during a monthly all-hands meeting. She was also
streaming live video to thousands of other employees at other locations, suppliers, and
stockholders throughout the world. The company had come a long way in implementing
new information systems to improve inventory control, sell products online, streamline
the sales and distribution processes, and improve customer service. However, a recent
security breach had alarmed investors and the stock price plummeted. People were
anxious to hear about the company's new strategies.
Anne began to address the audience, "Good morning. As you know, competition
is fierce in our industry. We have made a lot of progress the last few years to become
a more agile organization, especially in valuing people over process and responding to
change over following a plan. We all have to work together to overcome recent problems.
Our two most important goals include providing the best computer security possible
and improving online collaboration tools for our employees, suppliers, and customers.
Our challenge is to work even smarter to deliver solutions that provide the most benefit
for the company by leveraging the power of information technology. If we succeed, we'll
continue to be a world-class corporation."
"And if we fail?" someone asked from the audience.
"Let's just say that failure is not an option," Anne replied.
Introduction to Project Management
3

The unemployment rate for IT professionals is generally half the rate of the
overall labor market in the United States. The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
estimates the rate to be only 2 percent, and project management is one of the
ten hottest tech skills.3

In 2017, the average annual salary (without bonuses) for someone in the
project management profession was $112,00 per year in the United States
and $130,866 in Switzerland, the highest-paid country. Salaries of survey
­respondents across 37 counties were 23 percent higher for those with the
Project Management Professional (PMP) credential than those without it.4

The top skills employers look for in new college graduates are all related to
project management: team work, decision making, problem-solving, and
­verbal communications.5

Organizations waste $97 million for every $1 billion spent on projects,
according to PMI's Pulse of the Profession report. Excelling at project
­management definitely affects the bottom line.6
The complexity and importance of IT projects, which involve using hardware,
­software, and networks to create a product, service, or result, have evolved dramatically.
Today's companies, governments, and nonprofit organizations are recognizing that to be
successful, they need to use modern project management techniques, especially for IT
projects. Individuals are realizing that to remain competitive in the workplace, they must
develop skills to become good project team members and project managers. They also
realize that many of the concepts of project management will help them in their everyday
lives as they work with people and technology on a day-to-day basis.
W h a t W e n t W r o n g ?
In 1995, the Standish Group published an often-quoted study titled "The CHAOS
Report." This consulting firm surveyed 365 IT executive managers in the United States
who managed more than 8,380 IT application projects. As the title of the study suggests,
the projects were in a state of chaos. U.S. companies spent more than $250 billion each
year in the early 1990s on approximately 175,000 IT application development projects.
Examples of these projects included creating a new database for a state department
of motor vehicles, developing a new system for car rental and hotel reservations, and
implementing a client-server architecture for the banking industry. The study reported
that the overall success rate of IT projects was only 16.2 percent. The surveyors defined
success as meeting project goals on time and on budget. The study also found that more
than 31 percent of IT projects were canceled before completion, costing U.S. compa-
nies and government agencies more than $81 billion. The study authors were adamant
about the need for better project management in the IT industry. They explained,
"Software development projects are in chaos, and we can no longer imitate the three
monkeys-hear no failures, see no failures, speak no failures."7 Although this study was
(continued)
Chapter 1
4
Although several researchers question the methodology of such studies, the results
have prompted managers throughout the world to examine ways to improve their
­practices in managing projects. Many organizations assert that using project management
techniques provides advantages, such as the following:

Better control of financial, physical, and human resources

Improved customer relations

Shorter development times

Lower costs and improved productivity

Higher quality and increased reliability

Higher profit margins

Better internal coordination

Positive impact on meeting strategic goals

Higher worker morale
This chapter introduces projects and project management, explains how projects fit
into programs and portfolio management, discusses the role of the project manager, and
provides important background information on this growing profession. Although project
management applies to many different industries and types of projects, this text focuses
on applying project management to IT projects.
What is A Project?
To discuss project management, it is important to understand the concept of a project.
A project is "a temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product, service, or
result."9 Operations, on the other hand, is work done in organizations to sustain the
business. It focuses on the ongoing production of goods and services. Projects are different
from operations in that they end when their objectives have been reached or the project
has been terminated. It is important to note that people focusing on operations and
projects must work together for a smooth transition. For example, in software development,
DevOps is a fairly new term used to describe a culture of collaboration between software
development and operations teams to build, test, and release reliable software more quickly.
Examples of IT Projects
Projects can be large or small and involve one person or thousands of people. They can be
done in one day or take years to complete. As described earlier, IT projects involve using
hardware, software, and networks to create a product, service, or result. Examples of IT
projects include the following:
done 20 years ago, it was significant in making senior executives pay attention to the
­importance of IT project management.
In another large study, PricewaterhouseCoopers surveyed 200 companies from 30
different countries about their project management maturity and found that over half of
all projects fail. The study also found that only 2.5 percent of corporations consistently
meet their targets for scope, time, and cost goals for all types of projects.8
Introduction to Project Management
5

A large network of healthcare providers updates its information systems and
procedures to reduce hospital acquired diseases.

A team of students creates a smartphone application and sells it
online.

A company develops a driverless car.

A college upgrades its technology infrastructure to provide wireless Internet
access across the whole campus as well as online access to all academic and
student service information.

A company implements a new system to increase sales force productivity
and customer relationship management that will work on various laptops,
­smartphones, and tablets.

A television network implements a system to allow viewers to vote for
­contestants and provide other feedback on programs via social
media sites.

A government group develops a system to track child immunizations.

A large group of volunteers from organizations throughout the world develops
standards for environmentally friendly or green IT.

A global bank acquires other financial institutions and needs to consolidate
systems and procedures.

Government regulations require monitoring of pollutants in air and
water.

A multinational firm decides to consolidate its information systems into an
integrated enterprise resource management approach.
Gartner, Inc., a prestigious consulting firm, identified the top 10 strategic technologies
for 2018. A few of these technologies include the following:

Artificial Intelligence (AI) Foundation: Creating systems that learn, adapt,
and potentially act autonomously can enhance decision making and improve
the customer experience.

Intelligent Things: AI is driving advances for new intelligent things, including
autonomous vehicles, robots, and drones as well as Internet of Things like
thermostats, lights, and home appliances.

Cloud to the Edge: Edge computing pushes data handling to the edge
of the network, closer to the source of the data. Instead of sending data to
the cloud server or central data center for processing, the device connects
through a local gateway device, allowing faster analytics and reduced
network pressure.

Immersive Experience: Virtual, augmented, and mixed reality are changing
the way that people perceive and interact with the digital world. "The virtual
reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR) market is currently adolescent and
fragmented. Interest is high, resulting in many novelty VR applications that
deliver little real business value outside of advanced entertainment, such as
video games and 360-degree spherical videos. To drive real tangible business
benefit, enterprises must examine specific real-life scenarios where VR and AR
can be applied to make employees more productive and enhance the design,
training and visualization processes."10
Chapter 1
6
Project Attributes
Projects come in all shapes and sizes. The following attributes help define a project further:

A project has a unique purpose. Every project should have a well-defined
objective. For example, Anne Roberts, the director of the Project
Management Office in the chapter's opening case, might sponsor an IT
collaboration project to develop a list and initial analysis of potential IT
projects that might improve operations for the company. The unique purpose
of this project would be to create a collaborative report with ideas from
people throughout the company. The results would provide the basis for
further discussions and selecting projects to implement. As you can see from
this example, projects result in a unique product, service, or result.

A project is temporary. A project has a definite beginning and end. In the IT
collaboration project, Anne might form a team of people to work immediately
on the project, and then expect a report and an executive presentation of the
results in one month.

A project drives change and enables value creation. A project is initiated
to bring about a change in order to meet a need or desire. Its purpose is to
achieve a specific objective which changes the context (a living situation, in
this house project example) from a current state to a more desired or valued
future state.

A project is developed using progressive elaboration. Projects are often
defined broadly when they begin, and as time passes, the specific details
of the project become clearer. Therefore, projects should be developed in
increments. A project team should develop initial plans and then update
them with more detail based on new information.
M e d i a S n a p s h o t
One of Gartner's top 10 strategic technologies for 2012 included application stores and
marketplaces for smartphones and tablets. Gartner predicted that by 2014 there would
be more than 70 billion mobile application downloads every year, but the actual number
was almost double!11 Facebook is by far the most downloaded app, and the most popular
category of all apps continues to be games.
As of March 2017, Android users could download 2.8 million different apps, and
Apple users could download 2.2 million."In 2016, the global mobile internet user
­penetration has exceeded half the world's population, while the average daily time
spent accessing online content from a mobile device, such as a smartphone, a tablet
computer or wearable, has reached 185 minutes daily among Millennials, 110 minutes
for ­Generation X and 43 daily minutes for Boomers."12
As you can see, a wide variety of projects use information technologies, and
organizations rely on them for success.
Introduction to Project Management
7

A project requires resources, often from various areas. Resources
include people, hardware, software, and other assets. Many projects cross
departmental or other boundaries to achieve their unique purposes. For the
IT ­collaboration project, people from IT, marketing, sales, distribution, and
other areas of the company would need to work together to develop ideas.

A project should have a primary customer or sponsor. Most projects
have many interested parties or stakeholders, but for a project to succeed
someone must take the primary role of sponsorship. The project sponsor
usually provides the direction and funding for the project. Executive support
is crucial to project success, as described in later chapters. Anne Roberts
would be the sponsor for the IT collaboration project.

A project involves uncertainty. Because every project is unique, it is sometimes
difficult to define its objectives clearly, estimate how long it will take to
complete, or determine how much it will cost. External factors also cause
uncertainty, such as a supplier going out of business or a project team member
needing unplanned time off. This uncertainty is one of the main reasons project
management is so challenging, especially on projects involving new technologies.
An effective project manager is crucial to a project's success. Project managers work
with the project sponsors, team, and the other people involved to achieve project goals.
Project Constraints
Every project is constrained in different ways, often by its scope, time, and cost goals.
These limitations are sometimes referred to in project management as the triple
constraint. To create a successful project, a project manager must consider scope, time,
and cost and balance these three often-competing goals:

Scope: What work will be done as part of the project? What unique product,
service, or result does the customer or sponsor expect from the project? How
will the scope be verified?

Time: How long should it take to complete the project? What is the project's
schedule? How will the team track actual schedule performance? Who can
approve changes to the schedule?

Cost: What should it cost to complete the project? What is the project's
budget? How will costs be tracked? Who can authorize changes to the budget?
Figure 1-1 illustrates the three dimensions of the triple constraint. Each area-
scope, time, and cost-has a target at the beginning of the project. For example, the IT
collaboration project might have an initial scope of producing a 40- to 50-page report and
a one-hour presentation on about 30 potential IT projects. The project manager might
further define project scope to include providing a description of each potential project,
an investigation of what other companies have implemented for similar projects, a rough
time and cost estimate, and assessments of the risk and potential payoff as high, medium,
or low. The initial time estimate for this project might be one month, and the cost
estimate might be $45,000-$50,000. These expectations provide targets for the scope,
time, and cost dimensions of the project.
Chapter 1
8
Note that the scope and cost goals in this example include ranges-the report can
be 40 to 50 pages long and the project can cost between $45,000 and $50,000. Because
projects involve uncertainty and limited resources, projects rarely finish according to their
original scope, time, and cost goals. Instead of discrete target goals, it is often more realistic
to set a range for goals, such as spending between $45,000 and $50,000 and having a 40- to
50-page report. These goals might require hitting the target, but not the bull's eye.
Managing the triple constraint involves making trade-offs between scope, time, and
cost goals for a project. For example, you might need to increase the budget for a project
to meet scope and time goals. Alternatively, you might have to reduce the scope of a
project to meet time and cost goals. Experienced project managers know that you must
decide which aspect of the triple constraint is most important. If time is most important,
you must often change the initial scope and cost goals to meet the schedule. If scope goals
are most important, you may need to adjust time and cost goals.
To generate project ideas for the IT collaboration project, suppose that the project
manager sent an e-mail survey to all employees, as planned. The initial time and cost
estimate may have been one week and $5,000 to collect ideas using this e-mail survey. Now,
suppose that the e-mail survey generated only a few good project ideas, but the scope goal
was to collect at least 30 good ideas. Should the project team use a different method like
Figure 1-1  Project constraints
Successful project
management means
meeting all three
goals (scope, time,
and cost)-and
satisfying the project's
sponsor!
Target
Introduction to Project Management
9
focus groups or interviews to collect ideas? Even though it was not in the initial scope, time,
or cost estimates, it would really help the project. Because good ideas are crucial to project
success, it would make sense to inform the project sponsor that adjustments are needed.
Although the triple constraint describes how the basic elements of a project
interrelate, other elements can also play significant roles. Quality is often a key factor
in projects, as is customer or sponsor satisfaction. Some people, in fact, refer to the
quadruple constraint of project management, which includes quality as well as scope,
time, and cost. A project team may meet scope, time, and cost goals but might fail
to meet quality standards and satisfy the sponsor. For example, Anne Roberts may
receive a 50-page report describing 30 potential IT projects and hear a presentation that
summarizes the report. The project team may have completed the work on time and
within the cost constraint, but the quality may have been unacceptable.
Other factors might also be crucial to a particular project. On some projects,
resources are the main concern. For example, the entertainment industry often needs
particular actors for movies or television shows. Project goals must be adjusted based
on when particular people are available. Risk can also affect major project decisions.
A company might wait to start a project until the risks are at an acceptable level. The
project manager should be communicating with the sponsor throughout the project to
make sure it is meeting expectations. Chapter 10, Project Communications Management,
and Chapter 13, Project Stakeholder Management, address communicating with
stakeholders and understanding their expectations in greater detail.
How can you avoid the problems that occur when you meet scope, time, and cost
goals, but lose sight of customer satisfaction? The answer is good project management,
which includes more than managing project constraints.
What is Project Management?
Project management is "the application of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to
project activities to meet project requirements."13 Project managers must not only strive
to meet specific scope, time, cost, and quality goals of projects, but also facilitate the
entire process to meet the needs and expectations of people involved in project activities
or affected by them.
Figure 1-2 illustrates a framework to help you understand project management.
Key elements of this framework include the project stakeholders, project management
knowledge areas, project management tools and techniques, and the contribution of
successful projects to the enterprise.
Project Stakeholders
Stakeholders are the people involved in or affected by project activities, and include
the project sponsor, project team, support staff, customers, users, suppliers, and even
opponents of the project. These stakeholders often have very different needs and
expectations. A familiar example of a project is building a new house. There are several
stakeholders in a home construction project.

The project sponsors would be the potential new homeowners who would
be paying for the house. They could be on a very tight budget, so would
expect the contractor to provide a realistic idea of what type of home they
Chapter 1
10
could afford given their budget constraints. They would also need a realistic
idea of when they could move in. Regardless of budget, they would expect
the contractor to provide accurate estimates for the building costs. The new
homeowners would have to make important decisions to keep the costs of
the house within their budget. Can they afford to finish the basement right
away? If they can afford to finish the basement, will it affect the projected
move-in date? In this example, the project sponsors are also the customers
and users of the product, which is the house.

The house may require financing by a bank or other financial institution
like a credit union, which will secure a legal interest (lien) in the property
and the finished home. This institution is an example of a legal stakeholder
who must be informed of any changes to the plans or schedule because the
project is part of a legal contract.

The project manager in this example would normally be the general
contractor responsible for building the house. The project manager needs to
work with all the project stakeholders to meet their needs and expectations.

The project team for building the house would include several construction
workers, electricians, and carpenters. These stakeholders would need
to know exactly what work they must do and when they need to do it.
They would need to know if the required materials and equipment will be
at the construction site or if they are expected to provide the materials
and equipment. Their work would need to be coordinated because many
interrelated factors are involved. For example, the carpenter cannot put in
kitchen cabinets until the walls are completed.

Support staff might include the buyers' employers, the general contractor's
administrative assistant, and people who support other stakeholders. The
buyers' employers might expect their employees to complete their work
but allow some flexibility so they can visit the building site or take phone
Figure 1-2  Project management framework
10 Knowledge areas
Tools and
techniques
Project 1
Project 2
Project 3
Project 4
Project portfolio
Enterprise
success
Stakeholders'
needs and
expectations
Schedule
management
Cost
management
Quality
management
Scope
management
Resource
management
Communications
management
Risk
management
Procurement
management
Stakeholder
management
Project
success
Project integration management
Introduction to Project Management
11
calls related to building the house. The contractor's administrative assistant
would support the project by coordinating meetings between the buyers, the
contractor, suppliers, and other parties.

Building a house requires many suppliers. The suppliers would provide the
wood, windows, flooring, appliances, and other materials. Suppliers would
expect exact details on the items they need to provide, and where and when
to deliver those items.

A project might have opponents. In this example, a neighbor might oppose
the project because the workers make so much noise that she cannot
concentrate on her work at home, or the noise might wake her sleeping
children. She might interrupt the workers to voice her complaints or even
file a formal complaint. Or, the neighborhood might have association rules
concerning new home design and construction. If the homeowners do not
follow these rules, they might have to halt construction due to legal issues.
Even without such complaints, the home must comply with certain building
codes and other restrictions; these considerations may also result in changes
to the project's requirements, making the local government a stakeholder in
the project.
As you can see from this example, projects have many different stakeholders, and
they often have different interests. Stakeholders' needs and expectations are important in
the beginning and throughout the life of a project. Successful project managers develop
good relationships with project stakeholders to understand and meet their needs and
expectations.
Project Management Knowledge Areas
Project management knowledge areas describe the key competencies that project
managers must develop. The center of Figure 1-2 shows the 10 knowledge areas of project
management.
1. Project scope management involves defining and managing all the work
required to complete the project successfully.
2. Project schedule management (formerly called project time management)
includes estimating how long it will take to complete the work, developing an
acceptable project schedule, and ensuring timely completion of the project.
3. Project cost management consists of preparing and managing the budget for
the project.
4. Project quality management ensures that the project will satisfy the stated or
implied needs for which it was undertaken.
5. Project resource management is concerned with making effective use of the
people and physical resources involved with the project.
6. Project communications management involves generating, collecting,
disseminating, and storing project information.
7. Project risk management includes identifying, analyzing, and responding to
risks related to the project.
Chapter 1
12
8. Project procurement management involves acquiring or procuring goods and
services for a project from outside the performing organization.
9. Project stakeholder management includes identifying and analyzing
stakeholder needs while managing and controlling their engagement
throughout the life of the project.
10. Project integration management is an overarching function that affects and is
affected by all of the other knowledge areas.
Project managers must have knowledge and skills in all 10 of these areas. This text
includes an entire chapter on each of these knowledge areas because all of them are
crucial to project success.
Project Management Tools and Techniques
Thomas Carlyle, a famous historian and author, stated, "Man is a tool-using animal. Without
tools he is nothing, with tools he is all." As the world continues to become more complex,
it is even more important for people to develop and use tools, especially for managing
important projects. Project management tools and techniques assist project managers and
their teams in carrying out work in all 10 knowledge areas. For example, some popular
time-management tools and techniques include Gantt charts, project network diagrams,
and critical path analysis. Table 1-1 lists some commonly used tools and techniques by
knowledge area. You will learn more about these and other tools and techniques throughout
this text.
A survey of 753 project and program managers was conducted to rate several project
management tools. Respondents rated tools on a scale of 1-5 (low to high) based on
the extent of their use and the potential of the tools to help improve project success.
"Super tools" were defined as those that had high use and high potential for improving
project success. These super tools included software for task scheduling (such as project
management software), scope statements, requirement analyses, and lessons-learned
reports. Tools that are already used extensively and have been found to improve project
performance include progress reports, kick-off meetings, Gantt charts, and change
requests.
These super tools appear in column 3 of Table 1-1.14 Note that project stakeholder
management was not a separate knowledge area at the time of this survey.
The PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition now lists tools and techniques based on their
purpose, as follows:

Data gathering: benchmarking, brainstorming, check sheets, checklists,
focus groups, interviews, market research, questionnaires and surveys, and
statistical sampling

Data analysis: alternatives analysis, assessment of other risk parameters,
assumption and constraint analysis, cost of quality, cost-benefit analysis,
decision tree analysis, document analysis, earned value analysis, and several
other tools fit in this category
Introduction to Project Management
13
Knowledge
Area/Category
Tools and Techniques
Super Tools
Integration
management
Project selection methods
Project management methodologies
Stakeholder analyses
Work requests
Project charters
Project management plans
Change control boards
Project review meetings
Project management
software
Change requests
Lessons-learned
reports
Scope management
Statements of work
Scope management plans
Scope verification techniques
Scope change controls
Scope statements
Work breakdown
structures
Requirements
analyses
Schedule management
Project network diagrams
Critical path analysis
Crashing
Fast tracking
Schedule performance
measurements
Gantt charts
Cost management
Project budgets
Net present value
Return on investment
Payback analysis
Earned value management
Project portfolio management
Cost estimates
Cost management plans
Cost baselines
Quality management
Quality metrics
Checklists
Quality control charts
Pareto diagrams
Fishbone diagrams
Maturity models
Statistical methods
Test plans
Table 1-1  Common project management tools and techniques by knowledge area
(continued)
Chapter 1
14
Knowledge
Area/Category
Tools and Techniques
Super Tools
Resource management
Motivation techniques
Empathic listening
Responsibility assignment matrices
Project organizational charts
Resource histograms
Team building exercises
Communications
management
Communications management plans
Conflict management
Communications media selection
Status reports
Virtual communications
Templates
Project websites
Kick-off meetings
Progress reports
Risk management
Risk management plans
Risk registers
Probability/impact matrices
Risk rankings
Procurement
management
Make-or-buy analyses
Contracts
Requests for proposals or quotes
Source selections
Supplier evaluation matrices
Table 1-1  Common project management tools and techniques by knowledge
area (continued )

Data representation: affinity diagrams, cause-and-effect diagrams, control
charts, flow charts, hierarchical charts, histograms, logical data models,
matrix diagrams, matrix-based charts, mind mapping, probability and
impact matrix, scatter diagrams, stakeholder engagement assessment matrix,
stakeholder mapping/representation, and text-oriented formats

Decision making: multi-criteria decision analysis and voting

Communication: feedback and presentations

Interpersonal and team skills: active listening, communication styles
assessment, conflict management, cultural awareness, decision making,
emotional intelligence, facilitation, influencing, leadership, meeting
management, motivation, negotiation, networking, nominal group,
observation/conversation, political awareness, team building

Ungrouped: several other tools fit in this category
These long lists of tools and techniques can be overwhelming. This text will focus on
those used most often and with the most potential, providing the context and detailed
examples for using them. It is crucial for project managers and their team members to
Introduction to Project Management
15
determine which tools will be most useful for their particular projects. Selecting the
appropriate tools and techniques (as well the processes, inputs, outputs, and life cycle
phases, discussed later in this book) is part of project tailoring. Project management
should be tailored to meet the unique needs of projects, organizations, and most
importantly, people. After all, projects are done by, and for, people.
Despite its advantages, project management is not a silver bullet that guarantees
success on all projects. Some projects, such as those involving new technologies, have a
higher degree of uncertainty, so it is more difficult to meet their scope, schedule, and cost
goals. Project management is a very broad, often complex discipline. What works on one
project may not work on another, so it is essential for project managers to continue to
develop their knowledge and skills in managing projects. It is also important to learn from
the mistakes and successes of past projects.
W h a t W e n t R i g h t ?
Follow-up studies by the Standish Group (see the previously quoted "CHAOS" study in
the What Went Wrong? passage) showed improvement in the statistics for IT projects:

The number of successful projects (those completed on time, on budget with a
satisfactory result) was 29 percent in 2015 based on a sample of over 50,000 soft-
ware development projects worldwide. The number of failed projects (those can-
celed or not used after implementation) was 19 percent. That leaves 52 percent
of projects as challenged (over budget, late, and/or poorly implemented). These
numbers include projects of all sizes and methodologies.

The 2015 CHAOS study also summarized the success rates of projects by size,
showing that 62 percent of small projects were successful from 2011 to 2015
compared to only 2 percent of grand, 6 percent of large, 9 percent of medium,
and 21 percent of moderate size projects. Small projects are obviously easier to
complete successfully.

Agile approaches were also measured across all project sizes from 2011 to 2015,
showing that 39 percent of all agile projects were successful compared to 11 per-
cent of waterfall projects. For small projects, 58 percent of agile projects were suc-
cessful compared to 44 percent of waterfall projects. About 10,000 projects were
included for these statistics.15
According to the PMI research, across all industries, the average percentage of
projects that are deemed failures is 14 percent; the average for IT projects deemed
failures in 2016 also is 14 percent.16
Project Success
How do you define the success or failure of a project? The list that follows outlines a few
common criteria for measuring the success of a project, illustrating each with an example
of upgrading 500 desktop computers within three months for $300,000:
1. The project met scope, time, and cost goals. If all 500 computers were
upgraded and met other scope requirements, the work was completed in
three months or less, and the cost was $300,000 or less, you could consider
Chapter 1
16
the project successful. The Standish Group studies used this definition of
success, but several people question this simple definition of project success
and the methods used for collecting the data. (Search for articles by Robert
L. Glass to read more about this debate.)
2. The project satisfied the customer/sponsor. Even if the project met initial
scope, time, and cost goals, the users of the computers or their managers
might not be satisfied. Perhaps the project manager or team members never
returned calls or were rude. Perhaps users had their daily work disrupted
during the upgrades or had to work extra hours due to the upgrades. If the
customers were not happy with important aspects of the project, it would be
deemed a failure. Conversely, a project might not meet initial scope, time,
and cost goals, but the customer could still be very satisfied. Perhaps the
project team took longer and spent more money than planned, but they were
very polite and helped the users and managers solve several work-related
problems. Many organizations implement a customer satisfaction rating
system to measure project success instead of tracking only scope, time, and
cost performance.
3. The results of the project met its main objective, such as making or saving
a certain amount of money, providing a good return on investment, or
simply making the sponsors happy. Even if the project cost more than
estimated, it took longer to complete, and the project team was hard to work
with, the project would be successful if users were happy with the upgraded
computers, based on this criterion. As another example, suppose that the
sponsor approved the upgrade project to provide a good return on investment
by speeding up work and therefore generating more profits. If those goals
were met, the sponsor would deem the project a success, regardless of other
factors involved.
Why do some IT projects succeed and others fail? Table 1-2 summarizes the results of
the 2015 CHAOS study. The factors that contribute most to the success of IT projects are
listed in order of importance. Executive sponsorship is the most important factor, followed
by emotional maturity of the organization. A few of the top success factors relate to good
scope management, such as having clear business objectives and optimization. Project
management expertise continues to be a key success factor. In fact, experienced project
managers, who can often help influence all of these factors to improve the probability of
project success, led 97 percent of successful projects, based on an earlier CHAOS study.
A U.S. government report listed the top three reasons why federal technology projects
succeed:
1. Adequate funding
2. Staff expertise
3. Engagement from all stakeholders
Notice that the CHAOS study list does not include adequate funding. Most
nongovernment companies must either find adequate funds for important projects or
Introduction to Project Management
17
cancel projects if they cannot be funded or get an adequate return. Government projects
often require that funds be allocated a year or more before they even start, and estimates
often fall short. "The government has struggled when acquiring technology thanks to
the convoluted nature of the federal contracting process and the shortage of qualified
contracting officers and technical personnel. Critics argue that federal agencies get little
return for the $80 billion the government spends annually on IT. . . . 'History has shown
that government IT projects frequently face challenges of meeting cost, schedule or
performance goals,' said Sen. Susan Collins (R-Maine) in a statement."17
It is interesting to compare success factors for IT projects in the United States with
those in other countries. A survey of 247 information systems project practitioners
in mainland found that relationship management is viewed as a top success factor for
information systems in China, while it is not mentioned in U.S. studies. The study also
suggested that having competent team members is less important in China than in the
United States. The Chinese, like the Americans, included top management support, user
involvement, and a competent project manager as vital to project success.18
It is also important to look beyond individual project success rates and focus on
how organizations as a whole can improve project performance. Research comparing
companies that excel in project delivery-the "winners"-with those that do not found
four significant best practices:
1. Use an integrated toolbox. Companies that consistently succeed in managing
projects clearly define what needs to be done in a project, by whom, when,
and how. They use an integrated toolbox, including project management
tools, methods, and techniques. They carefully select tools, align them with
project and business goals, link them to metrics, and provide them to project
managers to deliver positive results.
Factors of Success
Points
Executive sponsorship
15
Emotional maturity
15
User involvement
15
Optimization
15
Skilled resources
10
Agile process
7
Modest execution
6
Project management expertise
5
Clear business objectives
4
Source: The Standish Group, "CHAOS Manifesto 2015" (2015).
Table 1-2  What helps projects succeed?
Chapter 1
18
2. Grow project leaders. The winners know that strong project managers-
referred to as project leaders-are crucial to project success. They also
know that a good project leader needs to be a business leader as well, with
strong interpersonal and intrapersonal skills. Companies that excel in project
management often grow or develop their project leaders internally, providing
them with career opportunities, training, and mentoring.
3. Develop a streamlined project delivery process. Winning companies have
examined every step in the project delivery process, analyzed fluctuations in
workloads, searched for ways to reduce variation, and eliminated bottlenecks
to create a repeatable delivery process. All projects go through clear stages
and clearly define key milestones. All project leaders use a shared road map,
focusing on key business aspects of their projects while integrating goals
across all parts of the organization.
4. Measure project health using metrics. Companies that excel in project
delivery use performance metrics to quantify progress. They focus on a
handful of important measurements and apply them to all projects. Metrics
often include customer satisfaction, return on investment, and percentage of
schedule buffer consumed.19
Project managers play an important role in making projects, and therefore
organizations, successful. Project managers work with the project sponsors, the project
team, and other stakeholders to meet project goals. They also work with sponsors to define
success for particular projects. Good project managers do not assume that their definition
of success is the same as the sponsors'. They take the time to understand their sponsors'
expectations and then track project performance based on important success criteria.
Program and Project Portfolio Management
About one-quarter of the world's gross domestic product is spent on projects. Projects
make up a significant portion of work in most business organizations or enterprises, and
managing those projects successfully is crucial to enterprise success. Two important
concepts that help projects meet enterprise goals are the use of programs and project
portfolio management.
Programs
A program is "a group of related projects, subsidiary programs, and program activities
managed in a coordinated manner to obtain benefits and control not available from
managing them individually."20 As you can imagine, it is often more economical to
group projects together to help streamline management, staffing, purchasing, and
other work. Programs are not large projects; a megaproject is a very large project that
typically costs over US$1 billion, affects over one million people, and lasts several years.
For examples, the Panama Canal Expansion Project was a megaproject that took 11 years
and $5.25 billion to complete. The following are examples of common programs in the
IT field.
Introduction to Project Management
19

Infrastructure: An IT department often has a program for IT infrastructure
projects. This program could encompass several projects, such as providing
more wireless Internet access, upgrading hardware and software, enhancing
computer security, and developing and maintaining corporate standards for IT.

Applications development: This program could include several projects, such
as updating an enterprise resource planning (ERP) system, purchasing a new
off-the-shelf billing system, or developing a new capability for a customer
relationship management system.

User support: In addition to the many operational tasks related to user
support, many IT departments have several projects to support users. For
example, a project might provide a better e-mail system or develop technical
training for users.
A program manager provides leadership and direction for the project managers
heading the projects within a program. Program managers also coordinate the efforts of
project teams, functional groups, suppliers, and operations staff supporting the projects
to ensure that products and processes are implemented to maximize benefits. Program
managers are responsible for more than the delivery of project results; they are change
agents responsible for the success of products and processes developed by those projects.
For example, the NASA International Space Station Program is led by a program manager
who oversees all U.S. projects involved with the station and is accountable for achieving
their objectives, funding, and contribution to scientific knowledge.
Program managers often have review meetings with all their project managers to share
important information and coordinate important aspects of each project. Many program
managers worked as project managers earlier in their careers, and they enjoy sharing
their wisdom and expertise with their project managers. Effective program managers
recognize that managing a program is much more complex than managing a single project.
They recognize that technical and project management skills are not enough-program
managers must also possess strong business knowledge, leadership capabilities, and
communication skills.
Project Portfolio Management
In many organizations, project managers also support an emerging business strategy of
project portfolio management or portfolio management, as called in this text, in which
organizations group and manage projects and programs as a portfolio of investments that
contribute to the entire enterprise's success. Portfolio managers help their organizations
make wise investment decisions by helping to select and analyze projects from a strategic
perspective. Portfolio managers may or may not have previous experience as project or
program managers. It is most important that they have strong financial and analytical
skills and understand how projects and programs can contribute to meeting strategic goals.
Figure 1-3 illustrates the differences between project management and project
portfolio management. Notice that the main distinction is a focus on meeting tactical or
strategic goals. Tactical goals are generally more specific and short term than strategic
goals, which emphasize long-term goals for an organization. Individual projects often
address tactical goals, whereas portfolio management addresses strategic goals. Project
Chapter 1
20
management addresses questions like "Are we carrying out projects well?", "Are projects
on time and on budget?", and "Do project stakeholders know what they should be doing?"
Portfolio management addresses questions like "Are we working on the right
projects?", "Are we investing in the right areas?", and "Do we have the right resources to
be competitive?" PMI defines a portfolio as "projects, programs, subsidiary portfolios, and
operations managed as a group to achieve strategic objectives."21
Many organizations use a more disciplined approach to portfolio management by
developing guidelines and software tools to assist in it. The Project Management Institute
(described later in this chapter) first published the Organizational Project Management
Maturity Model (OPM3) Knowledge Foundation in 2003.22 OPM3 describes the
importance of not only managing individual projects or programs well but also following
organizational project management to align projects, programs, and portfolios with
strategic goals. OPM3 is a standard that organizations can use to measure their
organizational project management maturity against a comprehensive set of best practices.
Figure 1-3  Project management compared to project portfolio
management
Tactical
goals
Strategic goals
Project management
Are we carrying out projects well?
Are projects on time and on budget?
Do project stakeholders know
what they should be doing?
Project portfolio management
Are we working on the right projects?
Are we investing in the right areas?
Do we have the right resources to be
competitive?
B e s t P r a c t i c e
A best practice is "an optimal way recognized by industry to achieve a stated goal or
objective."23 Rosabeth Moss Kanter, a professor at Harvard Business School and well-
known author and consultant, says that visionary leaders know "the best practice secret:
Stretching to learn from the best of the best in any sector can make a big vision more
likely to succeed."24 Kanter also emphasizes the need to have measurable standards for
best practices. An organization can measure performance against its own past, against
(continued)
Introduction to Project Management
21
Table 1-3 provides a comparative overview of project, program, and portfolio
management. Organizational project management is a "framework in which portfolio,
program, and project management are integrated with organizational enablers in order to
achieve strategic objectives."26
Organizational Project Management
Organizations group projects into portfolios to help them make better investment
decisions, such as increasing, decreasing, discontinuing, or changing specific projects or
programs based on their financial performance, risks, resource utilization, and similar
factors that affect business value. If a construction firm has much higher profit margins
on apartment buildings than single-family homes, for example, it might choose to pursue
more apartment building projects. The firm might also create a new project to investigate
ways to increase profits for single-family home projects. On the other hand, if the
company has too many projects focused on financial performance and not enough focused
on improving its work force, the portfolio manager might suggest initiating more projects
to support that strategic goal. Just like a personal financial portfolio, a business's portfolio
should be diversified to account for risk.
By grouping projects into portfolios, organizations can better tie their projects to
meeting strategic goals. Portfolio management can also help organizations do a better job
of managing its human resources by hiring, training, and retaining workers to support
peers, and, even better, against potential. Kanter suggests that organizations need to
continue to reach for higher standards. She suggests the following exercise regimen for
business leaders who want to adapt best practices in an intelligent way to help their own
organizations:

Reach high. Stretch. Raise standards and aspirations. Find the best of the best
and then use it as inspiration for reaching full potential.

Help everyone in your organization become a professional. Empower people to
manage themselves through benchmarks and standards based on best practice
exchange.

Look everywhere. Go far afield. Think of the whole world as your laboratory
for learning.
Robert Butrick, author of The Project Workout, wrote an article on best practices
in project management for the Ultimate Business Library's Best Practice book. He sug-
gests that organizations need to follow basic principles of project management, including
these two mentioned earlier in this chapter:

Make sure your projects are driven by your strategy. Be able to demonstrate
how each project you undertake fits your business strategy, and screen out
unwanted projects as soon as possible.

Engage your stakeholders. Ignoring stakeholders often leads to project failure.
Be sure to engage stakeholders at all stages of a project, and encourage team-
work and commitment at all times.25
Chapter 1
22
the projects in the organization's portfolio. For example, if the construction firm needs
more people with experience in building apartment buildings, they can make necessary
adjustments by hiring or training current workers in the necessary skills.
Projects
Programs
Portfolios
Definition
A project is a tem-
porary endeavor
undertaken to
create a unique
product, service,
or result.
A program is a group of
related projects, subsid-
iary programs, and pro-
gram activities that are
managed in a coordinated
way to obtain benefits not
available from managing
them individually.
A portfolio is a col-
lection of projects,
programs, subsid-
iary portfolios, and
operations managed
as a group to achieve
strategic objectives.
Management
Project manag-
ers manage the
project team to
meet the project
objectives.
Programs are managed
by program managers
who ensure that program
benefits are delivered as
expected, by coordinating
the activities of a pro-
gram's components.
Portfolio manag-
ers may manage or
coordinate portfolio
management staff, or
program and project
staff that may have
reporting respon-
sibilities into the
aggregate portfolio.
Monitoring
Project manag-
ers monitor and
control the work
of producing the
products, services,
or results that the
project was under-
taken to produce.
Program managers
monitor the progress of
program components to
ensure that the overall
goals, schedules, budget,
and benefits of the pro-
gram are met.
Portfolio managers
monitor strategic
changes and aggre-
gate resource alloca-
tion, performance
results, and risk of
the portfolio.
Success
Success is mea-
sured by product
and project qual-
ity, timeliness,
budget compli-
ance, and degree
of customer
satisfaction.
A program's success is
measured by the pro-
gram's ability to deliver
its intended benefits to an
organization, and by the
program' efficiency and
effectiveness in delivering
those benefits.
Success is measured
in terms of the
aggregate investment
performance and
benefit realization of
the portfolio.
Source: Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of
Knowledge (PMBOK Guide) - Sixth Edition (2017).
Table 1-3  Comparative Overview of Portfolios, Programs, and Projects
Introduction to Project Management
23
As you can imagine, project portfolio management is not an easy task. Figure 1-4
illustrates one approach for project portfolio management in which one large portfolio
exists for the entire organization. This allows top management to view and manage all
projects at an enterprise level. Sections of the portfolio are then broken down to improve
the management of projects in each sector. For example, a company might have the main
portfolio categories shown in the left part of Figure 1-4-marketing, materials, IT, and
human resources (HR)-and divide each of those categories further to address its unique
concerns. The right part of this figure shows how the IT projects could be categorized
in more detail to assist in their management. In this example, there are three basic IT
project portfolio categories:

Venture: Projects in this category help transform the business. For example,
the large retail chain described in the opening case might have an IT project
to provide kiosks in stores and similar functionality on the Internet where
customers and suppliers could quickly provide feedback on products or
services. This project could help transform the business by developing closer
partnerships with customers and suppliers.

Growth: Projects in this category would help the company increase its revenues.
For example, a company might have an IT project to provide information on
its corporate website in a new language, such as Chinese or Japanese. This
capability could help the company grow its business in those countries.

Core: Projects in this category must be accomplished to run the business. For
example, an IT project to provide computers for new employees would fall
under this category.
In Figure 1-4, the costs of Core IT projects are nondiscretionary, which means that
the company has no choice in whether to fund them. Core IT Projects must be funded
for the company to stay in business. Projects in the Venture or Growth category are
Figure 1-4  Sample project portfolio approach
Overall project portfolio categories
IT project portfolio categories
Risks, Value, Timing
Nondiscretionary
costs
Discretionary
costs
Venture:
Transform
the business
Growth:
Grow the
business
Core:
Run the
business
Marketing
Materials
IT
HR
Chapter 1
24
discretionary costs because the company can use its own discretion or judgment in
deciding whether to fund them; these projects are not critical to the company fulfilling
its mission. The arrow in the center of Figure 1-4 indicates that the risks and value of
projects normally increase as you move from Core to Growth to Venture projects. In
addition, timeliness becomes increasingly important; growth and venture projects, more
than core projects, must be done within a certain time frame to be effective. However,
some core projects can also be high risk, have high value, and require good timing. As you
can see, many factors are involved in portfolio management.
The Role Of The Project Manager
You have already read that project managers must work closely with the other
stakeholders on a project, especially the sponsor and project team. They are also more
effective if they are familiar with the 10 project management knowledge areas and
the various tools and techniques related to project management. Experienced project
managers help projects succeed. But what do project managers do, exactly? What skills
do they really need to do a good job? What is PMI's talent triangle? The next section
provides brief answers to these questions, and the rest of this book gives more insight
into the role of the project manager. Even if you never become a project manager, you
will probably be part of a project team, and it is important for team members to help
their project managers.
Project Manager Job Description
A project manager can have many different job descriptions, which can vary tremendously
based on the organization and the project. In fact, PMI includes a page on their website
to answer the question, "Who are project managers?" In addition to saying that project
managers are organized, passionate, and goal-oriented individuals who drive business
results by leading projects, PMI emphasizes that they are also change agents who work
well under pressure and enjoy challenging work environments.
Project management jobs can be found in every country and every industry. Sites like
indeed.com listed hundreds of thousands of job openings in 2018. Monster.com has a job
category for project management, and their site says that project managers "smoothly
link management, clients and staff to keep projects rolling. To be successful in a project
management job, you'll need people skills, business acumen and technical competence."27
Here are a few edited postings:

Project manager for a consulting firm: Plans, schedules, and controls
activities to fulfill identified objectives applying technical, theoretical, and
managerial skills to satisfy project requirements. Coordinates and integrates
team and individual efforts and builds positive professional relationships with
clients and associates.

Project manager for a computer systems firm: Works independently within
established practices to assist in the development and implementation
process of projects involving departmental, vendor relationships, and/or
cross-functional teams. Coordinates with internal/external clients to gather
Introduction to Project Management
25
business requirements and coordinate project plans. Monitor projects from
initiation through delivery ensuring completion of the project on schedule.

IT project manager for a nonprofit consulting firm: Responsibilities
include business analysis, requirements gathering, project planning, budget
estimating, development, testing, and implementation. Responsible for
working with various resource providers to ensure that development is
completed in a timely, high-quality, and cost-effective manner.
The job description for a project manager can vary by industry and by organization,
but most project managers perform similar tasks regardless of these differences. In fact,
project management is a skill needed in every major IT field, from database administrator
to network specialist to technical writer. Because demand for project managers is high,
some organizations have hired new college graduates to fill positions normally held by
experienced professionals. For example, Boom Lab, a consulting company named by
the Star Tribune as a top workplace in 2017, is growing quickly by finding, training,
and placing talented people as project coordinators. As new project coordinators gain
experience and credentials, they often continue their careers by managing larger projects,
becoming program managers, or transitioning into other management positions.
A d v i c e f o r Y o u n g P r o f e s s i o n a l s
How do you know if you would be a good project manager? Being a project manager is a
demanding yet rewarding profession, for the right person. Below are a few questions to
ask yourself:

Do you get frustrated by bad bosses? Do you think you could do a better job?

Are you interested in understanding the big picture of how organizations work
and how your individual work or your project fits in?

Have you had other leadership roles, such as being a team captain, president of
a club, or entrepreneur of a small business? Did you enjoy it? Did others think
you did a good job?

Are you good at mentoring others? Do people ask you for help in developing
their skills or your advice on what to do?
If you answered "yes" to most of these questions, you should consider being a
project manager. If you prefer just focusing on your own work and want to remain in a
technical position, there's absolutely nothing wrong with that. Just remember that it will
help you in the long run if you at least understand what project managers do and assist
them as needed doing things like creating estimates, identifying risks, etc.
What if you try it but no longer want to stay in a project management career path?
You can often go back to your former, more technical role, and move along that career
path. Or, many ex-project managers move into higher level management positions,
such as director, vice president, or even CEO. Some become consultants, educators,
or entrepreneurs. Their experience leading projects makes them marketable in several
different professions.
Chapter 1
26
Suggested Skills for Project Managers
Project managers need to have a wide variety of skills and be able to decide which skills
are more important in different situations. A Guide to the Project Management Body
of Knowledge-the PMBOK Guide-now includes a chapter called "The Role of the
Project Manager." It uses the analogy of a project manager being like a conductor or a
large orchestra. Conductors are not expected to be able to play every instrument in the
orchestra, but they should possess musical knowledge, understanding, and experience
required to conduct an orchestra. Similarly, a project manager in IT should possess
project management and IT knowledge, understanding of the project and how it will fit
into the organization, and experience in general management and human relations or soft
skills needed to guide the project team.
This chapter introduced the 10 project management knowledge areas, as well as
some general tools and techniques project managers use. The following section focuses
on the IT application area, including skills required in the project environment,
general management, and soft skills. Note that the PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition
describes project management competencies based on the talent triangle, described in
the following section.
The project environment differs from organization to organization and project to
project, but some skills will help in almost all project environments. These skills include
understanding change and understanding how organizations work within their social,
political, and physical environments. Project managers must be comfortable leading
and handling change, because most projects introduce changes in organizations and
involve changes within the projects themselves. Project managers need to understand
the organization in which they work and how that organization develops products and
provides services. The skills and behavior needed to manage a project for a Fortune
100 company in the United States may differ greatly from those needed to manage a
government project in Poland. Chapter 2, The Project Management and Information
Technology Context, provides detailed information on these topics.
Project managers should also possess general management knowledge and skills.
They should understand important topics related to financial management, accounting,
procurement, sales, marketing, contracts, manufacturing, distribution, logistics, the
supply chain, strategic planning, tactical planning, operations management, organizational
structures and behavior, personnel administration, compensation, benefits, career paths,
and health and safety practices. On some projects, it will be critical for the project
manager to have a lot of experience in one or several of these general management areas.
On other projects, the project manager can delegate detailed responsibility for some
of these areas to a team member, support staff, or even a supplier. Even so, the project
manager must be intelligent and experienced enough to know which of these areas are
most important and who is qualified to do the work. The project manager must make all
key project decisions and take responsibility for them.
Achieving high performance on projects requires soft skills, otherwise called human
relations skills. Some of these soft skills include effective communication, influencing the
organization to get things done, leadership, motivation, negotiation, conflict management,
and problem-solving. Why do project managers need good soft skills? One reason is that
Introduction to Project Management
27
to understand, navigate, and meet stakeholders' needs and expectations, project managers
need to lead, communicate, negotiate, solve problems, and influence the organization at
large. They need to be able to listen actively to what others are saying, help develop new
approaches for solving problems, and then persuade others to work toward achieving
project goals. Project managers must lead their project teams by providing vision,
delegating work, creating an energetic and positive environment, and setting an example
of appropriate and effective behavior. Project managers must focus on teamwork skills
to employ people effectively. They need to be able to motivate different types of people
and develop esprit de corps within the project team and with other project stakeholders.
Because most projects involve changes and trade-offs between competing goals, it is
important for project managers to have strong coping skills as well. Project managers
need to be able to cope with criticism and constant change. Project managers must be
flexible, creative, and sometimes patient in working toward project goals; they must also
be persistent in making project needs known.
Finally, project managers, especially those managing IT projects, must be able to
make effective use of technology as it relates to the specific project. Making effective use
of technology often includes special product knowledge or experience with a particular
industry.
Project managers must make many decisions and deal with people in a wide variety
of disciplines, so it helps tremendously to have a project manager who is confident in
using the special tools or technologies that are the most effective in particular settings.
Project managers do not normally have to be experts on any specific technology, but
they have to know enough to build a strong team and ask the right questions to keep
things on track. For example, project managers for large IT projects do not have to be
experts in the field of IT, but they must have working knowledge of various technologies
and understand how the project would enhance the business. Many companies have
found that good business managers can be very good IT project managers because they
focus on meeting business needs and rely on key project members to handle the
technical details.
A 2017 article published by CIO.com listed the six traits of highly effective project
managers as follows:
1. Be a strategic business partner.
2. Encourage and recognize valuable contributions.
3. Respect and motivate stakeholders.
4. Be fully vested in success.
5. Stress integrity and accountability.
6. Work in the gray/Be able to deal with ambiguity.28
All project managers should continue to develop their knowledge and experience in
project management, general management, soft skills, and the industries they support.
IT project managers must be willing to develop more than their technical skills to be
productive team members and successful project managers. Everyone, no matter how
technical they are, should develop business and soft skills.
Chapter 1
28
PMI Talent Triangle and the Importance of Leadership Skills*
PMI developed a talent triangle to emphasize the types of skills project managers need to
continuously develop. The talent triangle includes the following:
1. Technical project management skills: Understanding the knowledge areas,
process groups, and project management tools and techniques fall into this
category.
2. Strategic and business management skills: Topics include strategic
planning and financial management (described in more detail in Chapter 4),
accounting, marketing, and other topics listed in the previous section.
3. Leadership skills: Leadership and management are terms often used
interchangeably, although there are differences. Generally, a leader focuses
on long-term goals and big-picture objectives, while inspiring people to reach
those goals. A manager often deals with the day-to-day details of meeting
specific goals. Some people say that, "Managers do things right, and leaders
do the right things." "Leaders determine the vision, and managers achieve
the vision." "You lead people and manage things."
Leadership is a soft skill, and there is no one best way to be a leader. Peter Northouse,
author of a popular text called Leadership: Theory and Practice, says, "In the past 60
years, as many as 65 different classification systems have been developed to define the
dimensions of leadership."29 Some classification systems focus on group processes, while
others focus on personality traits or behaviors. For example, the PMBOK Guide - Sixth
Edition briefly describes the following leadership styles:
1. Laissez-faire: Meaning "let go," this hands-off approach lets teams determine
their own goals and how to achieve them.
2. Transactional: This management by exception approach focuses on achieving
goals or compliance by offering team members appropriate rewards and
punishments.
3. Servant leader: People using this approach focus on relationships and
community first and leadership is secondary.
4. Transformational: By working with others to identify needed changes, these
leaders empower others and guide changes through inspiration.
5. Charismatic: These people can inspire others based on their enthusiasm and
confidence.
6. Interactional: This leadership style is a combination of transactional,
transformational, and charismatic.
There are many different leadership styles in addition to the six listed above, and the
one thing most experts agree on is that the best leaders are able to adapt their style to
the needs of the situation. Also, while it may seem from the above list that such styles are
mutually exclusive, the fact is that most leaders exhibit more than one leadership style as
they adapt to their situations. Finally, the names of these styles should not be interpreted
as either good or bad by their labels-they can each be appropriate and effective given the
circumstances of a situation.
Introduction to Project Management
29
Daniel Goleman, author of Emotional Intelligence, also wrote a book called Primal
Leadership, which describes six different styles of leadership and situations where they
are most appropriate:
1. Visionary: Needed when an organization needs a new direction, and the goal
is to move people toward a new set of shared dreams. The leader articulates
where the group is going, but lets them decide how to get there by being free
to innovate, experiment, and take calculated risks.
2. Coaching: One-on-one style that focuses on developing individuals, showing
them how to improve their performance. This approach works best with
workers who show initiative and request assistance.
3. Affiliative: Emphasizes the importance of teamwork and creating harmony
by connecting people to each other. This approach is effective when trying to
increase morale, improve communication, or repair broken trust.
4. Democratic: Focuses on people's knowledge and skills and creates a
commitment to reaching shared goals. This leadership style works best when
the leader needs the collective wisdom of the group to decide on the best
direction to take for the organization.
5. Pacesetting: Used to set high standards for performance. The leader wants
work to be done better and faster and expects everyone to put forth their
best effort.
6.
Commanding: Most often used, also called autocratic or military style leadership.
This style is most effective in a crisis or when a turnaround is needed.
"The goal for leaders should be to develop a solid understanding of the different styles
of leadership and their implications, and reach the point where choosing the right one for
the situation becomes second nature to them."30
Project managers often take on the role of both leader and manager. Good project
managers know that people make or break projects, so they must set a good example to
lead their team to success. They are aware of the greater needs of their stakeholders and
organizations, so they are visionary in guiding their current projects and in suggesting
future ones.
As mentioned earlier, program managers need the same skills as project managers.
They often rely on their past experience as project managers, strong business knowledge,
leadership capability, and communication skills to handle the responsibility of overseeing
the multiple projects that make up their programs. It is most important that portfolio
managers have strong financial and analytical skills and understand how projects and
programs can contribute to meeting strategic goals.
Companies that excel in project, program, and portfolio management grow project
leaders, emphasizing development of business and leadership skills. Instead of thinking of
leaders and managers as specific people, it is better to think of people as having leadership
skills, such as being visionary and inspiring, and management skills, such as being
organized and effective. Therefore, the best project, program, and portfolio managers have
leadership and management characteristics; they are visionary yet focused on the bottom
line. Above all else, they focus on achieving positive results!
Chapter 1
30
Careers for IT Project Managers
As shown earlier, the IT industry continues to grow, and the need for people to lead IT
projects has remained solid. Most IT workers will be involved in project work, so it's
important to understand basic concepts of project management to help those projects
succeed.
IT executives listed the "ten hot tech skills" they planned to hire for in 2017. Full-
stack software development took first place, replacing programming and application
development. Full-stack developers are familiar with all layers in computer software
development and have experience in several programming languages and platforms.
They also understand different roles in IT (DevOps, design, quality assurance, database
administration, analytics, etc.) to effectively solve business problems. Project management
again came in second, as shown in Table 1-4.
The Project Management Profession
The project management profession is growing at a very rapid pace. To understand this
line of work, it is helpful to briefly review the history of project management, learn about
the Project Management Institute and some of its services (such as certification), and
examine the growth in project management software.
History of Project Management
Most people think that project management is a 20th century invention. But Mark Kozak-
Holland, certified PMP and author of books that mine history for insight about project
management, says that's wrong. He notes that major historical projects closely resemble
today's project management best practices. About his 2011 book The History of Project
Management, he said, "The general perception of most people is that project management
started in the mid-20th century, or started earlier with Henry Gantt and his charts. . . .
Yet, how were all the great projects of the past delivered? Think about the Giza Pyramid,
the Parthenon, the Coliseum, the Gothic Cathedrals of Medieval Europe, the great voyages
1. Full-stack software development
2. Project management
3. Cyber-security
4. Networking
5. User experience/user interface (UX/UI) design
6. Quality assurance (QA)/testing
7. Cloud engineering
8. Big data
9. Machine learning/artificial intelligence
10. DevOps
Source: Sharon Florentine, "10 IT skills that employers need in 2017," CIO from IDG
(February 1, 2017).
Table 1-4  Ten hot tech skills for 2017
Introduction to Project Management
31
of exploration, the Taj Mahal, and the mega projects of the industrial revolutions. Was
project management used on these projects? Were the concepts of project management
even understood? Can we connect modern and ancient project management?" Kozak-
Holland's answer to these questions is "yes." You can see the PMBOK process groups
and techniques from the knowledge areas in all of these historical projects. Project
management has been around since 2550 B.C.E.31
Although people have worked on projects for centuries, most agree that the modern
concept of project management began with the Manhattan Project, which the U.S. military
led to develop the atomic bomb in World War II. The Manhattan Project involved many
people with different skills at several different locations. It also clearly separated the
overall management of the project's mission, schedule, and budget under General Leslie
R. Groves and the technical management of the project under the lead scientist, Dr. Robert
Oppenheimer. The Manhattan Project lasted about three years and cost almost $2 billion
in 1946.
In developing the project, the military realized that scientists and other technical
specialists often did not have the desire or the necessary skills to manage large projects.
For example, after being asked several times for each team member's responsibilities at
the new Los Alamos laboratory in 1943, Dr. Oppenheimer tossed the project organization
chart at his director and said, "Here's your damn organization chart."32 Project
management was recognized as a distinct discipline requiring people with special skills
and, more importantly, the desire to lead project teams.
In 1917, long before the Manhattan project, Henry Gantt developed the famous Gantt
chart for scheduling work in factories. A Gantt chart is a standard format for displaying
project schedule information by listing project activities and their corresponding start
and finish dates in calendar form. Initially, managers drew Gantt charts by hand to show
project tasks and schedule information. This tool provided a standard format for planning
and reviewing all the work on early military projects.
Today's project managers still use the Gantt chart as the primary tool to communicate
project schedule information, but with the aid of computers, it is no longer necessary
to draw the charts by hand, and they are easier to share and disseminate to project
stakeholders. Figure 1-5 displays a Gantt chart created with Project 2016, the most widely
used project management software today. You will learn more about using Project 2016 in
Appendix A, which is available on the Companion website for this text.
During the Cold War years of the 1950s and 1960s, the military continued to play
an important role in refining several project management techniques. Members of the
U.S. Navy Polaris missile/submarine project first used network diagrams in 1958. These
diagrams helped managers model the relationships among project tasks, which allowed
them to create schedules that were more realistic. You will learn more about Gantt charts,
network diagrams, and other time management concepts in Chapter 6, Project Schedule
Management.
By the 1970s, the U.S. military and its civilian suppliers had developed software to
assist in managing large projects. Early project management software was very expensive
to purchase, and it ran exclusively on mainframe computers. For example, Artemis was
an early project management software product that helped managers analyze complex
schedules for designing aircraft. A full-time employee was often required to run the
Chapter 1
32
complicated software, and expensive pen plotters were used to draw network diagrams and
Gantt charts.
As computer hardware became smaller and more affordable and software companies
developed graphical, easy-to-use interfaces, project management software became less
expensive and more widely used. This made it possible-and affordable-for many
industries worldwide to use project management software on all types and sizes of
projects. New software makes basic tools such as Gantt charts and network diagrams
inexpensive, easy to create, and available for anyone to update. See the section later in
this chapter on project management software for more information.
In the 1990s, many companies began creating Project Management Offices to help
them handle the increasing number and complexity of projects. A Project Management
Office (PMO) is an organizational group responsible for coordinating the project
management function throughout an organization. A 2016 study found that 85 percent
of U.S. organizations reported having PMOs. Figure 1-6 shows the percentage based on
size. Small organizations were defined as those having revenues less than $100 million;
mid-size between $100 million and $1 billion, and large over $1 billion. These percentages
have grown from previous surveys, showing the growing importance of using standard
project management processes in organizations of all sizes. The study also found that
PMOs in high-performing organizations were twice as old, on average, as those in low
performers (6 vs. 3 years old).33
There are different ways to structure a PMO, and they can have various roles and
responsibilities. Organizations continue to modify their PMOs to ensure they add value
to their unique situations. For some organizations with very mature project management
processes and experienced managers, a small PMO focusing on organizing all project data
Figure 1-5  Sample Gantt chart from Project 2016 software development plan template
Introduction to Project Management
33
might be all that is needed. For an organization new to project management, a larger PMO
might be needed focusing on training and standards. PM Solutions identified three key
factors that are playing major roles in the growth of PMOs:
1. The growing strategic value of the PMO
2. The increased role of the PMO in training
3. The ever-present challenge of resource management
Below are possible goals of a PMO:

Collect, organize, and integrate project data for the entire organization.

Ensure that the organization's approaches for project management include
accepted and validated best practices.

Audit project documentation and offer feedback on project managers'
approaches and compliance with standards.

Develop and maintain templates, tools, and standards for project documents
and project methodologies to be used.

Develop or coordinate training in various project management topics.

Provide a formal career path for project managers.

Provide project management consulting services.

Provide a structure or department that project managers belong to while they
are assigned to a project or are between projects.
By the end of the 20th century, people in virtually every industry around the globe
began to investigate and apply different aspects of project management to their projects.
The sophistication and effectiveness with which project management tools are being
applied and used today is enabling companies to do business, use resources, and respond
to market requirements with greater speed and accuracy.
Figure 1-6  Percentage of organizations with PMOs by size
Percentage of Organizations with PMOs
80
75
83
95
100
90
0
20
30
10
50
40
60
70
Small
Mid-size
Large
Percentage
Source: PM Solutions, "The State of the Project Management Office (PMO) 2016," 2016.
Chapter 1
34
Many colleges, universities, and companies around the world now offer courses
related to different aspects of project management. You can even earn bachelor's,
master's, and doctoral degrees in project management. PMI reported that formal education
programs in project management continue to grow, especially in China and India, where
many infrastructure projects are needed. "In China, for example, the 104 institutions
offering project management programs receive more than 20,000 applications each year."
As projects become more global and teams are no longer stationed in the same city or
even country, students are learning a common project management language no matter
where they seek their education.34
The problems organizations have in managing projects, increasing education in
project management, and the belief that it can make a difference continue to contribute to
the growth of this field.
The Project Management Institute
Although many professional societies suffer from declining membership, the Project
Management Institute (PMI), an international professional society for project
managers founded in 1969, has continued to attract and retain members, reporting
more than 500,000 members worldwide by the end of 2017. Because so many people
work on projects in different industries throughout the world, PMI has parternered
with projectmanagement.com to create a global online community. The site provides
over 14,000 articles by industry experts, over 1,000 templates to save you time and
effort, and over 8,000 peer connections through a social networking system and
discussion forums.
G l o b a l I s s u e s
Based on a survey of more than 1,000 project management leaders across a variety of
experience levels and industries, several global dynamics are forcing organizations to
rethink their practices:

Talent development for project and program managers is a top concern.
Seventy percent of organizations have a career path for project and program
management, but most are still informal and not documented.

Basic project management techniques are core competencies. Seventy percent
of organizations said that they always or often use basic practices like change
management and risk management on their projects.

Organizations want to use more agile approaches to project management.
One-quarter of survey respondents said they now use agile techniques, and
agile project management was the most requested article topic.

Benefits realization of projects is a key metric. Organizations know that they
need to align projects and programs with the organization's business strategy.35
Introduction to Project Management
35
Project Management Certification
Professional certification is an important factor in recognizing and ensuring quality in a
profession. PMI provides certification as a Project Management Professional (PMP)-
someone who has documented sufficient project experience and education, agreed to
follow the PMI code of professional conduct, and demonstrated knowledge of project
management by passing a comprehensive examination. Note that you do not need work
experience to qualify for CompTIA's Project+ certification or PMI's CAPM certification,
so college graduates just entering the workforce can earn these certifications and become
more marketable.
The number of people earning PMP certification continues to increase. In 1993,
there were about 1,000 certified project management professionals. At the end of
December 2017, there were 827,960 active PMPs.36 Figure 1-7 shows the rapid growth
in the number of people earning PMP certification from 1993 to 2017.
Several studies show that organizations supporting technical certification
programs tend to operate in more complex IT environments and are more efficient
than organizations that do not support certification. Likewise, organizations that
support PMP certification see the value of investing in programs to improve their
employees' knowledge in project management. Many employers today require specific
certifications to ensure that their workers have current skills, and job seekers
find that they often have an advantage when they earn and maintain marketable
certifications. Global Knowledge listed PMP certification as number 5 in their list of
top-paying certifications for 2017.37
As IT projects become more complex and global in nature, the need for people
with demonstrated knowledge and skills in project management will continue. Just as
passing the CPA exam is a standard for accountants, passing the PMP exam is becoming
a standard for project managers. Some companies require that all project managers
P M I S t u d e n t M e m b e r s h i p
As a student, you can join PMI for a reduced fee ($32 versus $139 in 2018). Consult
PMI's website (www.pmi.org) for more information. With student membership, you can
network with other project management students by joining a local PMI chapter. Many
welcome students to attend free events, including talks and job networking. You can
volunteer your services to help develop your skills and serve your community. You can
also qualify for the Certified Associate in Project Management (CAPM) certification
without work experience. However, if you do have enough experience, the PMP is more
marketable, as described in the next section. Even if you intend to eventually achieve
a PMP certification, achieving an initial CAPM certification while you are gaining
the needed additional experience indicates to many employers that you are serious
about project management as a career and that you already know the fundamentals of
the profession. This can often result in your being among their preferred choices for
appointment to a PM role when it becomes available.
Chapter 1
36
be PMP certified. Project management certification is also enabling professionals in
the field to share a common base of knowledge. For example, any person with PMP
certification can list, describe, and use the 10 project management knowledge areas.
Sharing a common base of knowledge is important because it helps advance the theory
and practice of project management. PMI also offers additional certifications, including
agile techniques, scheduling, risk, program management, portfolio management, and
business analysis.
Ethics in Project Management
Ethics, loosely defined, is a set of principles that guides decision making based on
personal values of what is considered right and wrong. Making ethical decisions is an
important part of project managers' personal and professional lives because it generates
trust and respect with other people. Project managers often face ethical dilemmas. If
project managers can make more money by taking bribes, should they? No! Should
project managers accept subpar work to meet a deadline? No! Ethics guide us in making
these types of decisions.
PMI approved a Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct that took effect in
January 2007. This code applies not only to PMPs but to all PMI members who
hold a PMI certification, apply for a PMI certification, or serve PMI in a volunteer
capacity.
-
100,000
200,000
300,000
400,000
500,000
600,000
700,000
800,000
900,000
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
Number of PMPs
Year
Growth in PMP Certiﬁcation 1993-2017
Figure 1-7  Growth in PMP certification, 1993-2017
Source: Data points from Project Management Institute, PMI Today (annual issues).
Introduction to Project Management
37
It is vital for project management practitioners to conduct their work in an ethical
manner. Even if you are not affiliated with PMI, these guidelines can help you conduct
your work in an ethical manner, which helps the profession earn the confidence of the
public, employers, employees, and all project stakeholders. The PMI Code of Ethics
and Professional Conduct includes short chapters addressing vision and applicability,
responsibility, respect, fairness, and honesty. A few excerpts from this document include
the following:
"As practitioners in the global project management community:
2.2.1
We make decisions and take actions based on the best interests of society,
public safety, and the environment.
2.2.2
We accept only those assignments that are consistent with our background,
experience, skills, and qualifications.
2.2.3
We fulfill the commitments that we undertake-we do what we say we will do.
3.2.1
We inform ourselves about the norms and customs of others and avoid
engaging in behaviors they might consider disrespectful.
3.2.2
We listen to others' points of view, seeking to understand them.
3.2.3
We approach directly those persons with whom we have a conflict or
disagreement.
4.2.1
We demonstrate transparency in our decision-making process.
4.2.2
We constantly reexamine our impartiality and objectivity, taking corrective
action as appropriate.
4.3.1
We proactively and fully disclose any real or potential conflicts of interest to
appropriate stakeholders.
5.2.1
We earnestly seek to understand the truth.
5.2.2
We are truthful in our communications and in our conduct."38
In addition, PMI added a new series of questions to the PMP certification exam in
March 2002 and continues to include this topic to emphasize the importance of ethics and
professional responsibility.
Project Management Software*
The project management and software development communities have definitely
responded to the need to provide more software to assist in managing projects. There are
hundreds of tools available, ranging from free online or smartphone apps to enterprise
tools costing thousands of dollars to implement and high monthly fees per user. Deciding
which project management software to use has become a project in itself. Microsoft
Project continues to lead the Project Portfolio Management (PPM) market with 35 percent
of the $874 million market, followed by Oracle (19 percent), ServiceNow, Inc. (7 percent),
and SAP and Autodesk (5 percent each).39
See Appendix A (which is available on the Companion website for this text) for details
on the various configurations available for Microsoft Project and detailed instructions for
using Project Professional 2016. This section provides a summary of the basic types of
project management software available and references for finding more information.
Chapter 1
38
Many people still use basic productivity software such as Microsoft Word and Excel
to perform many project management functions, including determining project scope,
schedule, and cost, assigning resources, and preparing project documentation. People
often use productivity software instead of specialized project management software
because they already have it and know how to use it. However, there are hundreds of
project management software tools that provide specific functionality for managing
projects. These project management software tools can be divided into three general
categories based on functionality and price:

Low-end tools: These tools provide basic project management features
and generally cost less than $200 per user or a low monthly fee for online
software. They are often recommended for small projects and single users.
Most of these tools allow users to create Gantt charts, which cannot be done
easily using current productivity software. Some of these tools are available
online while others are stand-alone desktop applications. There are also
several smartphone applications, and many online tools include smartphone
integration. Examples of popular low-end tools include Basecamp,
Smartsheet, and Zoho Projects.

Midrange tools: A step up from low-end tools, midrange tools are designed
to handle larger projects, multiple users, and multiple projects. All of these
tools can produce Gantt charts and network diagrams, and can assist in
critical path analysis, resource allocation, project tracking, status reporting,
and other tasks. Prices range from about $200 to $600 per user or require a
monthly fee per user. Microsoft Project (Professional, to be specific) is still
the most widely used project management software today in this category
and in general. There is also an enterprise or PPM version of Microsoft
Project, as described briefly below and in more detail from Microsoft's
website.

High-end tools: Another category of project management software is high-
end tools, sometimes referred to as PPM or enterprise project management
F r e e T r i a l s a n d I n f o r m a t i o n o n
U s i n g P r o j e c t 2 0 1 6 , M i n d V i e w ,
B a s e c a m p , a n d O t h e r S o f t w a r e
A 30-day evaluation copy of "Project Online Professional" is available from Microsoft's
website. You can also access a 30-day trial version of MindView software for PCs, Macs,
or an online version at www.matchware.com. Basecamp is a totally online project
management tool. Educators can request a free Basecamp account without a time
restriction from www.basecamp.com.
Note that Appendix A: Brief Guide to Microsoft Project Professional 2016 is
available on the Companion website for this text.
Introduction to Project Management
39
software, as described earlier. These tools provide robust capabilities to
handle very large projects, dispersed workgroups, and enterprise and
portfolio management functions that summarize and combine individual
project information to provide an enterprise view of all projects. These
products are generally licensed on a per-user basis, integrate with enterprise
database management software, and are accessible via the Internet and
smartphones. In mid-2002, Microsoft introduced the first version of its
Enterprise Project Management software, and in 2003, it introduced the
Microsoft Enterprise Project Management solution, which was updated
several times since then. In 2008, Oracle acquired Primavera Software, Inc.,
another popular tool for project-intensive industries.
Several free or open-source tools are also available. For example, ProjectLibre,
LibrePlan, and OpenProject are all free open-source project management tools.
Remember, however, that these tools are developed, managed, and maintained by
volunteers and may not be well supported.
There are also several software tools that focus on managing agile projects. A
January 2018 Google search found a list of 55 agile project management solutions from
the site www.softwareadvice.com. Tools listed included Asana, Trello, Jira, Wrike, and
VersionOne, to name a few. Of course Microsoft Project and other tools listed earlier can
also be used to manage agile projects.
Remember that there is much more to managing successful projects than using
software.
There are many reasons to study project management, particularly as it relates
to IT projects. The number of IT projects continues to grow in almost every industry,
the complexity of these projects continues to increase, and the profession of project
management continues to expand and mature. As more people study and work in this
important field, the success rate of IT projects should continue to improve.
C a s e W r a p - U p
In addition to overseeing their two high-priority projects (computer security and online
collaboration) Anne Roberts worked with the VPs and the CEO to form teams to help
identify other potential IT projects that would support their business strategies. They
formed a project team to implement a portfolio project management software tool across
the organization. They formed another team to develop project-based reward systems
for all employees. They also authorized funds for a project to educate all employees
in project management and agile, to help people earn PMP and related certifications,
and to develop a mentoring program. Anne had successfully convinced everyone that
effectively managing projects was crucial to their company's future.
Chapter 1
40
Chapter Summary
Many people and organizations have a new or renewed interest in project management as the
number of projects continues to grow and their complexity continues to increase. The success
rate of IT projects has more than doubled since 1995, but still only about one-third are successful
in meeting scope, time, and cost goals. Using a more disciplined approach to managing projects
can help projects and organizations succeed.
A project is a temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product, service, or
result. An IT project involves the use of hardware, software, and networks. Projects are unique,
temporary, and developed incrementally; they require resources, have a sponsor, and involve
uncertainty. The triple constraint of project management refers to managing the scope, time,
and cost dimensions of a project. It is important to address these dimensions as well as other
constraints (such as quality, resources, and risks) and to satisfy the project sponsor.
Project management is the application of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to project
activities to meet project requirements. Stakeholders are the people involved in or affected
by project activities. A framework for project management includes the project stakeholders,
project management knowledge areas, and project management tools and techniques. The 10
knowledge areas are project integration management, scope, schedule, cost, quality, resource,
communications, risk, procurement, and stakeholder management. There are many tools and
techniques in each knowledge area. There are different ways to define project success, and
project managers must understand the criteria that define success for their unique projects.
A program is a group of related projects, subsidiary programs, and program activities
managed in a coordinated way to obtain benefits and control that are not available from
managing the projects individually. Project portfolio management involves organizing and
managing projects and programs as a portfolio of investments that contribute to the entire
enterprise's success. Portfolio management emphasizes meeting strategic goals, while project
management focuses on tactical goals. Studies show that user involvement is crucial to project
success, as are other factors like executive support and clear business objectives.
Project managers play a key role in helping projects and organizations succeed. They
must perform various job duties, possess many skills, and continue to develop skills in project
management, general management, and their application area, such as IT. Soft skills, especially
leadership, are particularly important for project managers.
The profession of project management continues to grow and mature. In the United States,
the military took the lead in project management and developed many tools such as Gantt charts
and network diagrams, but today people use project management in virtually every industry
around the globe. The Project Management Institute (PMI) is an international professional society
that provides several certifications and upholds a code of ethics. Today, hundreds of project
management software products are available to assist people in managing projects.
Introduction to Project Management
41
Discussion Questions
1. Why is there a new or renewed interest in the field of project management?
2. What is a project, and what are its main attributes? How is a project different from what most
people do in their day-to-day jobs? What is the triple constraint? What other factors affect a
project?
3. What is project management? Briefly describe the project management framework,
providing examples of stakeholders, knowledge areas, tools and techniques, and project
success factors.
4. What is a program? What is a project portfolio? Discuss the relationship between projects,
programs, and portfolio management and the contributions that each makes to enterprise
success.
5. What is the role of the project manager? What are suggested skills for all project managers
and for IT project managers? Why is leadership so important for project managers? How is
the job market for IT project managers?
6. Briefly describe some key events in the history of project management. What role do
the Project Management Institute and other professional societies play in helping the
profession?
7. What functions can you perform with project management software? What are the main
differences between low-end, midrange, and high-end project management tools?
8. Discuss ethical decisions that project managers often face. Do you think a professional code
of ethics makes it easier to work in an ethical manner?
Quick Quiz
1. By 2027, employers will need over ____________ million individuals working in project
management-oriented roles.
a.
27
b.
47
c.
67
d.
87
2. Which of the following is not a potential advantage of using good project management?
a.
Shorter development times
b.
Higher worker morale
c.
Lower cost of capital
d.
Higher profit margins
Chapter 1
42
3. A ____________ is a temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product, service,
or result.
a.
program
b.
process
c.
project
d.
portfolio
4. Which of the following is not an attribute of a project?
a.
Projects are unique.
b.
Projects are developed using progressive elaboration.
c.
Projects have a primary customer or sponsor.
d.
Projects involve little uncertainty.
5. Which of the following is not part of the triple constraint of project management?
a.
Meeting scope goals
b.
Meeting time goals
c.
Meeting communications goals
d.
Meeting cost goals
6. ____________ is the application of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to project
activities to meet project requirements.
a.
Project management
b.
Program management
c.
Project portfolio management
d.
Requirements management
7. Project portfolio management addresses ____________ goals of an organization, while
project management addresses ____________ goals.
a.
strategic, tactical
b.
tactical, strategic
c.
internal, external
d.
external, internal
8. Several application development projects done for the same functional group might best be
managed as part of a ____________.
a.
portfolio
b.
program
c.
investment
d.
collaborative
9. Which of the following is not true?
a.
Most American companies have a project management office.
b.
You can earn an advanced degree in project management from hundreds of colleges
and universities.
Introduction to Project Management
43
c.
Employers are looking for project management skills in new graduates.
d.
PMI's talent triangle includes leadership and information technology skills along with
project management.
10. What is the name of one of the popular certifications provided by the Project Management
Institute?
a.
Certified Project Manager (CPM)
b.
Project Management Professional (PMP)
c.
Project Management Expert (PME)
d.
Project Management Mentor (PMM)
Quick Quiz Answers
1. d; 2. c; 3. c; 4. d; 5. c; 6. a; 7. a; 8. b; 9. d; 10. b
Exercises
1. Read at least two of the first five references cited in this chapter with statistics about
the importance of IT and project management. Create a short paper or presentation
summarizing which information is most interesting and intriguing to you and why.
2. Find someone who works as a project manager or someone who works on projects
involving IT, such as a worker in your school's IT department or a project manager active
in a professional group, like PMI. Prepare several interview questions to learn more about
projects and project management, and then ask your questions in person, through e-mail,
over the phone, or using other technology. Write a summary of your findings.
3. Write a paper summarizing key information available on the PMI's website (www.pmi.org).
Also read and summarize two recent reports from PMI, including "Pulse of the Profession:
Success Rates Rise: Transforming the High Cost of Low Performance: (2017). Note:
Instructors can break this into two exercises by specifying the second report.
4. Find any example of a real project with a real project manager. Feel free to use projects in
the media (such as the Olympics, television shows, or movies) or a project from your work,
if applicable. Write a paper describing the project in terms of its scope, time, and cost goals.
Also describe other impacts on a project, such as quality, resources, and risks. Discuss
what went right and wrong on the project and the role of the project manager and sponsor.
Also describe whether the project was a success, and why. Include at least one reference
and cite it on the last page.
5. Watch a free online video on the history of project management created by Mark Kozak-Holland
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C1uxCBx2-UQ). Summarize how the project
management knowledge areas can be applied to building the Giza Pyramid Project.
6. Research articles and tools on project portfolio management. Summarize the advantages of
performing project portfolio management as well as challenges.
Chapter 1
44
7. Skim through Appendix A on Microsoft Project 2016 (available on the Companion
website for this text). Review information about Project 2016 from the Microsoft website
(www.microsoft.com). Research three other project management software tools,
including at least one smartphone app. Write a paper answering the following questions:
a. What functions does project management software provide that you cannot do easily
using other tools such as a spreadsheet or database?
b. How do the different tools you reviewed compare with Project 2016, based on cost of the
tool, key features, and other relevant criteria?
c. How can organizations justify investing in enterprise or portfolio project management
software?
8. Research information about PMP and CAPM certifications. Find at least two articles
on this topic. What are benefits of certification in general? Do you think it is worthwhile for
most project managers to get certified? Is it something you would consider? Write a paper
summarizing your findings and opinions.
9. Review PMI's Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct. Find and summarize two articles
related to ethics in project management.
Key Terms
best practice
charismatic
DevOps
enterprise project
management software
ethics
Gantt chart
interactional
laissez-faire
leader
manager
megaproject
organizational project management
portfolio
program
program manager
project
project and portfolio management software
project management
Project Management Institute (PMI)
project management knowledge
areas
Project Management Office (PMO)
Project Management Professional (PMP)
project management tools and techniques
project manager
project portfolio management or portfolio
management
project sponsor
servant leader
stakeholders
transactional
transformational
triple constraint
Introduction to Project Management
45
Endnotes

1 Gartner, Inc., "Gartner Says Worldwide IT Spending Forecast to Grow 2.4 Percent in 2017"
(April 2, 2014).

2 Project Management Institute, "Project Management Job Growth and Talent Gap" (2017).

3 Mary K. Pratt, "10 hottest tech skills for 2017," ComputerWorld (December 7, 2016).

4 Project Management Institute, Earning Power: Project Management Salary Survey 10th
­Edition (2017).

5 Adams, Susan, "The 10 Skills Employers Most Want in 2015 Graduates," Forbes (November
12, 2014).

6 Project Management Institute, "Pulse of the Profession: Success Rates Rise: Transforming
the High Cost of Low Performance" (2017).

7 Standish Group, "The CHAOS Report," www.standishgroup.com (1995). Another reference
is Jim Johnson, "CHAOS: The Dollar Drain of IT Project Failures," Application Development
Trends (January 1995).

8 PricewaterhouseCoopers, "Boosting Business Performance Through Programme and
Project Management" (June 2004).

9 Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of
Knowledge (PMBOK Guide) - Sixth Edition (2017), p. 4.

10 Gartner, Inc. "Gartner Identifies the Top 10 Strategic Technologies for 2018," Gartner Press
Release (October 4, 2017).

11 Niall McCarthy, "Mobile App Usage by the Numbers," Forbes (October 29, 2014).

12 Statista, "Number of apps available in leading app stores as of March 2017," (March 2017).

13 Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of
Knowledge (PMBOK Guide) - Sixth Edition (2017), p. 10.

14 Claude Besner and Brian Hobbs, "The Perceived Value and Potential Contribution of
Project Management Practices to Project Success," PMI Research Conference Proceedings
(July 2006).

15 Shane Hastie and Stéphane Wojewoda, "Standish Group 2015 Chaos Report - Q&A with
Jennifer Lynch," InfoQ (October 4, 2015).

16 Sharon Florentine, "IT project success rates finally improving," CIO from IDG (February 27,
2017).

17 Gautham Nagesh, "GAO Tells Congress Why Federal IT Projects Succeed," The Hill
(November 22, 2011).

18 Chao Dong, K.B. Chuah, and Li Zhai, "A Study of Critical Success Factors of Information
System Projects in China," Proceedings of PMI Research Conference, London (2004).

19 Dragan Milosevic and And Ozbay, "Delivering Projects: What the Winners Do," Proceedings
of the Project Management Institute Annual Seminars & Symposium (November 2001).

20 Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of
Knowledge (PMBOK Guide) - Sixth Edition (2017), p. 11.
Chapter 1
46

21 Ibid., p. 11.

22 Project Management Institute, Organizational Project Management Maturity Model (OPM3)
Knowledge Foundation (2003).

23 Ibid., p. 13.

24 Ultimate Business Library, Best Practice: Ideas and Insights from the World's Foremost
Business Thinkers (New York: Perseus, 2003), p. 1.

25 Ibid., p. 8.

26 Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of
Knowledge (PMBOK Guide) - Sixth Edition (2017), p. 17.

27 Monster, "Project Management Industry Overview," www.monster.com/jobs/q-project-
management-jobs.aspx (accessed October 16, 2017).

28 Moira Alexander, "6 traits of highly effective project managers," CIO from IDG
(August 4, 2017).

29 Peter Northouse, Leadership: Theory and Practice, Seventh Edition, SAGE Publications,
Inc. (2015), p. 5.

30 Bendelta, "Goleman's 6 leadership styles - and when to use them," Fast Company
(December 9, 2014).

31 "The History of Project Management-Author's Perspective," YouTube video, Narration
from "An Introduction to the History of Project Management," Posted by Projectlessons,
December 19, 2010, www.youtube.com/watch?v=dYgMT57I7UI.

32 Regents of the University of California, Manhattan Project History, "Here's Your Damned
Organization Chart" (1998-2001).

33 PM Solutions, "The State of the Project Management Office (PMO) 2016," 2016.

34 Project Management Institute, "Project Management Education Articles," www.pmiteach.org
(January 2015).

35 Project Management Institute, PMI's Pulse of the Profession: Driving Success in
Challenging Times (March 2012).

36 Project Management Institute, PMI Today (February 2018).

37 John Hales, "15 Top-Paying Certifications for 2017," Global Knowledge (2017).

38 Project Management Institute, PMP Credential Handbook (August 31, 2011), pp. 48-51.

39 Albert Pang, "Top 10 Project Portfolio Management Software Vendors and Market Forecast
2015-2020," Apps Run The World (June 30, 2016).

* Sections with an asterisk are taken from Kathy Schwalbe, An Introduction to Project
Management, Sixth Edition, Schwalbe Publishing (2017).
C h a p t e r 2
The Project
Management and
Information Technology
Context
L e a r n i n g O b j e c t i v e s
After reading this chapter, you will be able to:

Define the systems view of project management and how it applies to
information technology (IT) projects

Summarize organizations, including the four frames, organizational
structures, and organizational culture

Explain why stakeholder management and top management commitment
are critical for a project's success

Distinguish between project and product life cycles

Discuss the unique attributes and diverse nature of IT projects

Summarize recent trends affecting IT project management, including
globalization, outsourcing, virtual teams, and agile project management
Chapter 2
48
O p e n i n g C a s e
Tom Walters was watching the 2018 Super Bowl with friends and noticed players,
coaches, and referees using tablets to review plays. It reminded him of a bad experience
he had over ten years ago when he tried to convince his college to require students to use
tablets. Tom had accepted a new position as the Director of Information Technology at
his small, private college after having been a respected faculty member for 15 years. The
college offered a variety of programs in the liberal arts and professional areas. Enrollment
included 1,500 full-time traditional students and about 1,000 working adults who
attended evening programs. Like other institutions of higher learning, the use of IT at the
college had grown tremendously, but only a few classrooms on campus had computers
for the instructors and students, and most other classrooms had only instructor stations
and projection systems. Tom knew that several colleges throughout the country require
that all students lease or own laptops or tablets and that these colleges incorporate
technology into most courses.
This idea fascinated him at the time. He and two other members of the IT
department visited a local college that had required all students to lease laptops for
the past three years, and they were very impressed with what they saw and heard.
Because tablets were becoming more popular, they thought it would make more
sense to require tablets instead of laptops. Tom had heard how easy it was for faculty
members to create interactive course materials that would run on tablets; these
materials also could help reduce the cost of textbooks, a concern expressed by many
students. Tom and his staff developed plans to start requiring students either to lease
or purchase tablets at their college starting the next academic year.
Tom sent an e-mail to all faculty and staff that September briefly describing his
plans. He did not get much response, however, until the February faculty meeting. As he
described some of the details of his plan, the chairs of the History, English, Philosophy,
and Economics departments all voiced opposition to the idea. They eloquently stated
that the college was not a technical training school and that they did not have time to
write their own course materials to run on tablets. They liked the books they used, and
students could already buy books in an electronic format, but most preferred the print
versions. Members of the Computer Science department voiced their concern that almost
all of their students already had state-of-the art laptops and would not want to pay a
mandatory fee to lease less-powerful tablets. The director of the adult education program
expressed her concern that many adult-education students would balk at an increase
in fees or required technology. Tom was in shock to hear his colleagues' responses,
especially after he and his staff had spent a lot of time planning how to implement tablets
at their campus. He remembered being totally confused at the time due to his lack of
understanding of organizational change. He wondered how the National Football League
handled their implementation of tablets.
Many of the theories and concepts of project management are not difficult to understand.
What is difficult is implementing them in various environments. Project managers must
consider many different issues when managing projects. Just as each project is unique, so
is its environment. This chapter discusses some of the concepts involved in understanding
the project environment, such as using a systems approach, understanding organizations,
The Project Management and Information Technology Context
49
managing stakeholders, matching product life cycles to the project environment, under-
standing the context of IT projects, and reviewing recent trends that affect IT project
management.
A Systems View of Project Management
Even though projects are temporary and intended to provide a unique product or service,
you cannot run projects in isolation. If project managers lead projects in isolation, it is
unlikely that they will ever truly serve the needs of the organization. Therefore, projects
must operate in a broad organizational environment, and project managers need to con-
sider projects within the greater organizational context. To handle complex situations
effectively, project managers need to take a holistic view of a project and understand how
it relates to the larger organization. Systems thinking describes this holistic view of carry-
ing out projects within the context of the organization.
What Is a Systems Approach?
The term systems approach emerged in the 1950s to describe a holistic and analytical
approach to solving complex problems that includes using a systems philosophy, systems
analysis, and systems management. Systems are sets of interacting components that work
within an environment to fulfill some purpose. For example, the human body is a system
composed of many subsystems, including the nervous system, the skeletal system, the
circulatory system, and the digestive system. Organizations are also systems, with people
in various roles working together to design, develop, deliver, and sell various products and
services. A systems philosophy is an overall model for thinking about things as systems.
Systems analysis is a problem-solving approach that requires defining the scope of
the system, dividing it into components, and then identifying and evaluating its problems,
opportunities, constraints, and needs. Once this is completed, the systems analyst then
examines alternative solutions for improving the current situation; identifies an optimum,
or at least satisfactory, solution or action plan; and examines that plan against the entire
system. Systems management addresses the business, technological, and organizational
issues associated with creating, maintaining, and modifying a system.
Using a systems approach is critical to successful project management. If top manage-
ment and project managers are to understand how projects relate to the whole organization,
they must follow a systems philosophy. They must use systems analysis to address needs
with a problem-solving approach. They must use systems management to identify key
issues in business, technological, and organizational spheres related to each project in order
to identify and satisfy key stakeholders and do what is best for the entire organization.
In the chapter's opening case, Tom Walters planned the tablet project without using
a systems approach. Members of his IT department did all of the planning. Even though
Tom sent an e-mail describing the tablet project to all faculty and staff, he did not address
many of the organizational issues involved in such a complex project. Most faculty and
staff are very busy at the beginning of the fall term, and many may not have read the
entire message. Others may have been too busy to communicate their concerns to the IT
department. Tom was unaware of the effects the tablet project would have on other parts
Chapter 2
50
of the college. He did not clearly define the business, technological, and organizational
issues associated with the project. Tom and the IT department began work on the tablet
project in isolation. If they had taken a systems approach, considering other dimensions
of the project and involving key stakeholders, they could have identified and addressed
many of the issues raised at the February faculty meeting before the meeting.
The Three-Sphere Model for Systems Management
Many business and IT students understand the concepts of systems and performing a systems
analysis. At the same time, they often overlook systems management. However, addressing
the three spheres of systems management-business, organization, and technology-can
have a huge impact on selecting and managing projects successfully.
Figure 2-1 provides a sample of business, organizational, and technological issues
that could be factors in the tablet project. In this case, technological issues, though not
simple by any means, are probably the least difficult to identify and resolve. However,
projects must address issues in all three spheres of the systems management model.
Although it is easier to focus on the immediate and sometimes narrow concerns of a
particular project, project managers and other staff must recognize the effects of any
project on the interests and needs of the entire system or organization. The college pres-
ident and senior administrators, in particular, will focus on whether the tablet project
adds value to the college as a whole.
Figure 2-1  Three-Sphere model for systems management
Business
Organization
Technology
What will the tablet project cost the college?
What will it cost students?
What will support costs be?
What will the impact be on enrollments?
Will the tablet project
affect all students, just
traditional students, or
only certain majors?
How will the project
affect students
who already have
tablets or laptops?
Who will develop
special applications
or books for the
tablets?
Who will train
students, faculty,
and staff?
Should the tablets
be based on Apple,
Microsoft, Android,
or another system?
What applications will
be required?
What will the hardware
speciﬁcations be?
How will the tablets
affect various networks
and speed?
Will more power cords
be required in the
classroom?
The Project Management and Information Technology Context
51
Many IT professionals become captivated with the technology and day-to-day
problem solving involved in working with information systems. They tend to become
frustrated with many of the "people problems" or politics involved in most organiza-
tions. In addition, many IT professionals ignore important business questions, such as
"Does it make financial sense to pursue this new technology?" or "Should the company
develop this software in-house or purchase it off the shelf?" Using a more holistic
approach helps project managers integrate business and organizational issues into their
planning. It also helps them look at projects as a series of interrelated phases. When
you integrate business and organizational issues into project management planning
and look at projects as a series of interrelated phases, you do a better job of ensuring
project success.
A d v i c e f o r Y o u n g P r o f e s s i o n a l s
It's difficult enough trying to understand the various technologies an organization uses.
How can you begin to understand the business and organizational aspects? First of all,
make it a priority. Don't just focus on the technology, no matter how exciting it seems
to you. Even if you take just a few minutes each day learning about other aspects of the
organization, that's a start. Second, tell your boss or other people you work with that
you want to understand how the entire organization works. Ask important questions like
how the company makes money, who key customers are, what the priorities are for the
year, what meetings you can attend or documents you can read to gain more knowledge,
etc. Third, fourth, and fifth: network, network, network! Find out which people inside
or outside of your organization can help you in developing a systems approach. You
might be surprised how quickly you can move up in your career once you understand
the big picture.
Understanding Organizations
The systems approach requires that project managers always view their projects in the
context of the larger organization. Organizational issues are often the most difficult part
of working on and managing projects. In fact, many people believe that most projects fail
because of organizational issues like company politics. Project managers often do not
spend enough time identifying all the stakeholders involved in projects, especially the
people opposed to the projects. Also, project managers often do not spend enough time
considering the political context of a project or the culture of the organization. To improve
the success rate of IT projects, it is important for project managers to develop a better
understanding of people as well as organizations.
The Four Frames of Organizations
As shown in Figure 2-2, you can try to understand organizations better by focusing on
different perspectives. Organizations can be viewed as having four different frames:
structural, human resources, political, and symbolic.1
Chapter 2
52

The structural frame deals with how the organization is structured (usually
depicted in an organizational chart) and focuses on different groups' roles and
responsibilities to meet the goals and policies set by top management. This frame
is very rational and focuses on coordination and control. For example, within
the structural frame, a key IT issue is whether a company should centralize the
IT personnel in one department or decentralize across several departments. You
will learn more about organizational structures in the next section.

The human resources (HR) frame focuses on producing harmony between
the needs of the organization and the needs of people. It recognizes that
mismatches can occur between the needs of the organization and those
of individuals and groups, and works to resolve any potential problems.
For example, many projects might be more efficient for the organization if
employees worked 80 or more hours a week for several months. However,
this work schedule would conflict with the personal lives and health of many
employees. Important IT issues related to the human resources frame are the
shortage of skilled IT workers within the organization and unrealistic sched-
ules imposed on many projects.

The political frame addresses organizational and personal politics. Politics
in organizations take the form of competition among groups or individuals
for power, resources, and leadership. The political frame emphasizes that
organizations are coalitions composed of varied individuals and interest
groups. Often, important decisions need to be made about the allocation of
scarce resources. Competition for resources makes conflict a central issue
in organizations, and power improves the ability to obtain those resources.
Project managers must pay attention to politics and power if they are to
be effective. It is important to know who opposes your projects as well as
who supports them. Important IT issues related to the political frame are
the differences in power between central functions and operating units or
between functional managers and project managers.
Figure 2-2  Perspectives on organizations2
Structural frame: Roles
and responsibilities,
coordination, and control.
Organizational charts help
describe this frame.
Human resources frame:
Providing harmony
between needs of the
organization and needs
of people.
Political frame: Coalitions
composed of varied
individuals and interest
groups. Conﬂict and
power are key issues.
Symbolic frame: Symbols
and meanings related to
events. Culture, language,
traditions, and image are
all parts of this frame.
Source: Bolman and Deal.
The Project Management and Information Technology Context
53

The symbolic frame focuses on symbols and meanings. In this frame, the
most important aspect of any event in an organization is not what actually
happened, but what it means. Was it a good sign that the CEO came to a
kick-off meeting for a project, or was it a threat? The symbolic frame also
relates to the company's culture. How do people dress? How many hours do
they work? How do they run meetings? Many IT projects are international
and include stakeholders from various cultures. Understanding those cultures
is also a crucial part of the symbolic frame.
Project managers must learn to work within all four frames to function well in orga-
nizations. Organizational issues are discussed further in Chapter 9, Project Resource
Management, Chapter 10, Project Communications Management, and Chapter 13, Project
Stakeholder Management. The following sections on organizational structures, organiza-
tional culture, stakeholder management, and the need for top management commitment
provide additional information related to the structural and political frames.
W h a t W e n t W r o n g ?
In a paper titled "A Study in Project Failure," two researchers examined the success
and failure of 214 IT projects over an eight-year period in several European countries.
The researchers found that only one in eight (12.5 percent) were considered successful
in terms of meeting scope, time, and cost goals. The authors made the following
conclusions about factors that contribute to a project's failure:
"Our evidence suggests that the culture within many organisations is often such that
leadership, stakeholder and risk management issues are not factored into projects early
on and in many instances cannot formally be written down for political reasons and
are rarely discussed openly at project board or steering group meetings although they
may be discussed at length behind closed doors. . . . Despite attempts to make software
development and project delivery more rigorous, a considerable proportion of delivery
effort results in systems that do not meet user expectations and are subsequently
cancelled. In our view this is attributed to the fact that very few organisations have
the infrastructure, education, training, or management discipline to bring projects to
successful completion."3
Organizational Structures
Many discussions of organizations focus on their structure, which can take many forms.
Three general classifications of organizational structures are functional, project or project-
oriented, and matrix. Figure 2-3 portrays these three structures, and Table 2-1 describes
several more. A functional organizational structure is the hierarchy most people think
of when picturing an organizational chart. Functional managers or vice presidents in spe-
cialties such as engineering, manufacturing, IT, and human resources report to the chief
executive officer (CEO). Their staffs have specialized skills in their respective disciplines.
Chapter 2
54
Figure 2-3  Functional, project, and matrix organizational structures
VP Engineering
VP Manufacturing
VP IT
VP HR
CEO
Staff
Staff
Staff
Staff
Functional
Program Manager A
CEO
Staff
Staff
Staff
Project
Program Managers
CEO
Staff
Staff
Staff
Matrix
VP Engineering
VP HR
Staff
VP Manufacturing
Staff
VP IT
Project Manager A:
2 engineering
1/2 HR
1 manufacturing
31/2 IT
Project Manager B:
5 engineering
1 HR
3 manufacturing
10 IT
Project Manager C:
1 engineering
1/10 HR
0 manufacturing
4 IT
Program Manager B
Program Manager C
For example, most colleges and universities have very strong functional organizations.
Only faculty members in the business department teach business courses; faculty in the
history department teach history; faculty in the art department teach art, and so on. If the
college or university offers graduate and undergraduate programs, they might also have a
divisional structure to further distinguish roles and responsibilities for those programs.
A project organizational structure also is hierarchical, but instead of functional man-
agers or vice presidents reporting to the CEO, program managers report to the CEO. Their
staffs have a variety of skills needed to complete the projects within their programs. An
organization that uses this structure earns its revenue primarily from performing projects
The Project Management and Information Technology Context
55
for other groups under contract. For example, many defense, architectural, engineering,
and consulting companies use a project organizational structure. These companies often
hire people specifically to work on particular projects.
A matrix organizational structure represents the middle ground between functional
and project structures. Personnel often report both to a functional manager and to one
or more project managers. For example, IT personnel at many companies often split
their time between two or more projects, but they report to their manager in the IT
department. Project managers in matrix organizations have staff from various functional
areas working on their projects, as shown in Figure 2-3. Matrix organizational structures
can be strong, weak, or balanced, based on the amount of control exerted by the project
managers. Problems can occur if project team members are assigned to several projects in
a matrix structure and the project manager does not have adequate control of their time.
Table 2-1 summarizes how organizational structures influence projects and project
managers, based on the PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition. Note that several additional
organizational structures (besides functional, project oriented, and matrix) are listed,
including organic or simple, multi-divisional, virtual, hybrid, and PMO. Project managers
have the most authority in a pure project-oriented or PMO organizational structure and
the least amount of authority in a pure functional, organic/simple, or multi-divisional
organizational structure. It is important that project managers understand their current
organizational structure. For example, if someone in a functional organization is asked
to lead a project that requires strong support from several different functional areas, he
or she should ask for top management sponsorship. This sponsor should solicit support
from all relevant functional managers to ensure that they cooperate on the project and
that qualified people are available to work as needed. The project manager might also ask
for a separate budget to pay for project-related trips, meetings, and training or to provide
financial incentives to the people supporting the project.
Even though project managers have the most authority in the project and PMO
organizational structures, this type of organization can be inefficient for the company
as a whole. Assigning staff full time to the project often creates underutilization and
misallocation of staff resources. For example, if a technical writer is assigned full time to
a project, but has no project work on a particular day, the organization is wasting money
by paying that person a full-time wage. Project organizations may also miss economies of
scale that are available through pooling requests for materials with other projects. Most
large organizations, therefore, use a variety of structures. For example, General Motors
is first organized divisionally by Global Market (North America, Asia, Europe, etc.), then
divisionally by consumer product (Chevy, Buick, Cadillac, etc.), and then within those by
function (Marketing, Manufacturing, IT, Accounting, Design, Sales, Quality, Engineering,
etc.), and finally within each of those by project. No wonder project managers struggle to
understand their organizations!
Disadvantages such as these illustrate the benefit of using a systems approach to
managing projects. For example, the project manager might suggest hiring an independent
contractor to do the technical writing work instead of using a full-time employee. This
approach would save the organization money while still meeting the needs of the project.
When project managers use a systems approach, they are better able to make decisions
that address the needs of the entire organization.
Chapter 2
56
Project Characteristics
Organiza-
tional Struc-
ture Type
Work Groups
Arranged by:
Project
Manager's
Authority
Project Manager's
Role
Resource
Avail-
ability
Who Man-
ages the
Project
Budget?
Project
Manage-
ment
Adminis-
trative Staff
Organic or
Simple
Flexible;
people working
side-by-side
Little or
none
Part-time; may or
may not be a des-
ignated job role
like coordinator
Little or
none
Owner or
operator
Little or
none
Functional
(centralized)
Job being
done (e.g.,
engineering,
manufacturing)
Little or
none
Part-time; may or
may not be a des-
ignated job role
like coordinator
Little or
none
Func-
tional
manager
Part-time
Multi-divi-
sional ( may
replicate
functions for
each divi-
sion with
little cen-
tralization)
One of: prod-
uct; produc-
tion processes;
portfolio;
program; geo-
graphic region;
customer type
Little or
none
Part-time; may or
may not be a des-
ignated job role
like coordinator
Little or
none
Func-
tional
manager
Part-time
Matrix
- strong
By job func-
tion, with proj-
ect manager as
a function
Moderate to
high
Full-time
designated job
role
Moder-
ate to
high
Project
manager
Full-time
Matrix
- weak
Job function
Low
Part-time; done
as part of another
job and not a
designated job role
like coordinator
Low
Func-
tional
manager
Part-time
Matrix
- balanced
Job function
Low to
moderate
Part-time; embed-
ded in the func-
tions as a skill and
may not be a des-
ignated job role
like coordinator
Low to
moderate
Mixed
Part-time
Project-
oriented
(composite,
hybrid)
Project
High to
almost total
Full-time desig-
nated job role
High to
almost
total
Project
manager
Full-time
Virtual
Network
structure with
nodes at points
of contact with
other people
Low to
moderate
Full-time or
part-time
Low to
moderate
Mixed
Could
be full-
time or
part-time
Table 2-1  Influences of organizational structures on projects
The Project Management and Information Technology Context
57
Hybrid
Mix of other
types
Mixed
Mixed
Mixed
Mixed
Mixed
PMO*
Mix of other
types
High to
almost total
Full-time desig-
nated job role
High to
almost
total
Project
manager
Full-time
*PMO refers to a portfolio, program, or project management office or organization.
Source: Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowl-
edge (PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition) (2017).
Table 2-1  Influences of organizational structures on projects (continued)
Organizational Culture
Just as an organization's structure affects its ability to manage projects, so does its
culture. Organizational culture is a set of shared assumptions, values, and behaviors
that characterize the functioning of an organization. It often includes elements of all
four frames described previously. Organizational culture is very powerful, and many
people believe that the underlying causes of many companies' problems are not in the
organizational structure or staff; they are in the culture. It is also important to note
that the same organization can have different subcultures. The IT department may
have a different organizational culture than the finance department, for example. Some
organizational cultures make it easier to manage projects.
According to Stephen P. Robbins and Timothy Judge, authors of a popular textbook on
organizational behavior, there are 10 characteristics of organizational culture:
1. Member identity: The degree to which employees identify with the
organization as a whole rather than with their type of job or profession. For
example, project managers or team members might feel more dedicated to
their company or project team than to their job or profession, or they might
not have any loyalty to a particular company or team. As you can guess,
an organizational culture in which employees identify more with the whole
organization are more conducive to a good project culture.
2. Group emphasis: The degree to which work activities are organized around
groups or teams, rather than individuals. An organizational culture that
emphasizes group work is best for managing projects.
3. People focus: The degree to which management's decisions take into account
the effect of outcomes on people within the organization. A project manager
might assign tasks to certain people without considering their individual
needs, or the project manager might know each person very well and focus
on individual needs when assigning work or making other decisions. Good
project managers often balance the needs of individuals and the organization.
4. Unit integration: The degree to which units or departments within an organi-
zation are encouraged to coordinate with each other. Most project managers
strive for strong unit integration to deliver a successful product, service, or
result. An organizational culture with strong unit integration makes the proj-
ect manager's job easier.
Chapter 2
58
5.
Control: The degree to which rules, policies, and direct supervision are used to
oversee and control employee behavior. Experienced project managers know it
is often best to balance the degree of control to get good project results.
6. Risk tolerance: The degree to which employees are encouraged to be aggres-
sive, innovative, and risk seeking. An organizational culture with a higher
risk tolerance is often best for project management because projects often
involve new technologies, ideas, and processes.
7.
Reward criteria: The degree to which rewards, such as promotions and salary
increases, are allocated according to employee performance rather than senior-
ity, favoritism, or other nonperformance factors. Project managers and their
teams often perform best when rewards are based mostly on performance.
8. Conflict tolerance: The degree to which employees are encouraged to air
conflicts and criticism openly. It is very important for all project stakeholders
to have good communications, so it is best to work in an organization where
people feel comfortable discussing differences openly.
9.
Means-ends orientation: The degree to which management focuses on out-
comes rather than on techniques and processes used to achieve results. An
organization with a balanced approach in this area is often best for project work.
10.
Open-systems focus: The degree to which the organization monitors and
responds to changes in the external environment. As you learned earlier in
this chapter, projects are part of a larger organizational environment, so it is
best to have a strong open-systems focus.4
As you can see, there is a definite relationship between organizational culture and
successful project management. Project work is most successful in an organizational
culture where employees identify more with the organization, where work activities
emphasize groups, and where there is strong unit integration, high risk tolerance,
performance- based rewards, high conflict tolerance, an open-systems focus, and a
balanced focus on people, control, and means orientation.
Focusing on Stakeholder Needs
Recall from Chapter 1 that project stakeholders are the people involved in or affected by
project activities. Stakeholders can be internal or external to the organization, directly
involved in the project, or simply affected by the project. Internal project stakeholders
include the project sponsor, project team, support staff, and internal customers of the proj-
ect. Other internal stakeholders include top management, other functional managers, and
other project managers. Projects affect these additional internal stakeholders because they
use the organization's limited resources. Thus, while additional internal stakeholders may
not be directly involved in the project, they are still stakeholders because the project affects
them in some way. External project stakeholders include the project's customers (if they are
external to the organization), competitors, suppliers, and other external groups potentially
involved in the project or affected by it, such as government officials or concerned citizens.
Because the purpose of project management is to meet project requirements and
satisfy stakeholders, it is critical that project managers take adequate time to identify,
The Project Management and Information Technology Context
59
understand, and manage relationships with all project stakeholders. Using the four frames
of organizations to think about project stakeholders can help you meet their expectations.
See Chapter 13, Project Stakeholder Management, for more information.
Consider again the tablet project from the opening case. Tom Walters seemed to focus
on just a few internal project stakeholders. He viewed only part of the structural frame of
the college. Because his department would do most of the work in administering the tablet
project, he concentrated on those stakeholders. He did not even involve the main custom-
ers for this project-the students at the college. Even though Tom sent an e-mail to faculty
and staff, he did not hold meetings with senior administrators or faculty at the college.
Tom's view of the project stakeholders was very limited.
During the faculty meeting, it became evident that the tablet project had many stake-
holders in addition to the IT department and students. If Tom had expanded his view of the
structural frame of his organization by reviewing an organizational chart for the entire college,
he could have identified other key stakeholders. He would have been able to see that the proj-
ect would affect academic department heads and members of different administrative areas,
especially if he wanted faculty members to develop customized course materials themselves.
If Tom had focused on the human resources frame, he would have been able to tap into his
knowledge of the school and identify people who would most support or oppose requiring
tablets. By using the political frame, Tom could have considered the main interest groups that
would be most affected by the project's outcome. Had he used the symbolic frame, Tom could
have tried to address what moving to a tablet environment would really mean for the college.
He then could have anticipated some of the opposition from people who were not in favor of
increasing the use of technology on campus. He also could have solicited a strong endorse-
ment from the college president or dean before talking at the faculty meeting.
Tom Walters, like many new project managers, learned the hard way that technical
and analytical skills were not enough to guarantee success in project management. To
be more effective, he had to identify and address the needs of different stakeholders and
understand how his project related to the entire organization. And unlike the NFL, his
college was not being paid to use tablets, as described in the following Media Snapshot.
M e d i a S n a p s h o t
Prior to the 2014 football season, Microsoft paid the NFL $400 million as part of a
five-year deal to use their Surface as "the official tablet of the NFL." The Microsoft logo
is on the tablets as well as the replay monitors used by officials. The Surfaces replaced
banks of printers used in the past to print out images of each play, a slow, wasteful
process. The Surfaces run a special app that links with cameras to provide instant video
of plays. Users can review plays over and over again and mark up images with a stylus.
All 32 NFL teams were involved, and the deal was renewed for a sixth year in 2017.
Yusuf Mehdi, corporate vice president at Microsoft, said, "We're excited to help the NFL
change the game with Surface devices being used by players and coaches on the sidelines
(continued)
Chapter 2
60
The Importance of Top Management Commitment
A very important factor in helping project managers successfully lead projects is the level
of commitment and support they receive from top management. Without this commit-
ment, many projects will fail. Some projects have a senior manager called a champion who
acts as a key advocate for a project. The sponsor can serve as the champion, but often
another manager can more successfully take on this role. As described earlier, projects are
part of the larger organizational environment, and many factors that might affect a project
are out of the project manager's control. Several studies cite executive support as one of
the key factors associated with virtually all project success.
Top management commitment is crucial to project managers for the following reasons:

Project managers need adequate resources. The best way to kill a project is to
withhold the required money, human resources, and visibility. If project manag-
ers have top management commitment, they will also have adequate resources
and not be distracted by events that do not affect their specific projects.

Project managers often require approval for unique project needs in a timely
manner. For example, on large IT projects, top management must understand
that unexpected problems may result from the nature of the products being
developed and the specific skills of people on the project team. The team
might need additional hardware and software halfway through the project for
proper testing, or the project manager might need to offer special pay and
benefits to attract and retain key project personnel. With top management
commitment, project managers can meet these needs.

Project managers must have cooperation from people in other parts of the
organization. Because most IT projects cut across functional areas, top
management must help project managers deal with the political issues that
often arise. If certain functional managers are not responding to project
managers' requests for necessary information, top management must step in
to encourage the functional managers to cooperate.

Project managers often need someone to mentor and coach them on
leadership issues. Many IT project managers come from technical positions
to make more informed decisions, referees using Surface for instant replay to enhance
the speed of the game, and teams using Microsoft products in their business and football
operations."5
Was it a smooth transition to using the tablets? Not quite. During week one of the
season at least two television announcers mistakenly referred to the tablets as iPads,
giving Apple unexpected exposure. Microsoft also had to defend the use of tablets after
the New England Patriots stopped using them. Coach Bill Belichick "ranted that he was
'done with the tablets' during a five-minute-long expression of pure frustration at the
Surface tablets and the technology surrounding them. 'I'm going to stick with pictures,
which several of our other coaches do, as well, because there just isn't enough consis-
tency in the performance of the tablets. I just can't take it anymore,' said Belichick,
weeks after smashing a Surface tablet on the sidelines."6
The Project Management and Information Technology Context
61
and are inexperienced as managers. Senior managers should take the time to
give advice on how to be good leaders. They should encourage new project
managers to take classes to develop leadership skills and allocate the time
and funds for managers to do so.
IT project managers work best in an environment in which top management values IT.
Working in an organization that values good project management and sets standards for its
use also helps project managers succeed.
The Need for Organizational Commitment to Information Technology
Another factor that affects the success of IT projects is the organization's commitment
to IT in general. It is very difficult for an IT project to be successful if the organization
itself does not value IT. Many companies have realized that IT is integral to their business
and have created a vice president or equivalent position for the head of IT, often called
the Chief Information Officer (CIO). Some companies assign people from non-IT areas to
work full time on large projects and increase involvement from end users of the systems.
Some CEOs even take a strong leadership role in promoting the use of IT in their organi-
zations and empower employees to use IT effectively.
B e s t P r a c t i c e
A major element of good practice concerns IT governance, which addresses the
authority for and control of key IT activities in organizations, including IT infrastructure,
IT use, and project management. (The term project governance can also be used to
describe a uniform method of controlling all types of projects.) The IT Governance
Institute (ITGI) was established in 1998 to advance international thinking and standards
in directing and controlling an organization's use of technology. Effective IT governance
helps ensure that IT supports business goals, maximizes investment in IT, and addresses
IT-related risks and opportunities. A 2004 book by Peter Weill and Jeanne Ross titled
IT Governance: How Top Performers Manage IT Decision Rights for Superior Results7
includes research indicating that firms with superior IT governance systems have
20 percent higher profits than firms with poor governance.
A lack of IT governance can be dangerous, as evidenced by three well-publicized IT
project failures in Australia: Sydney Water's customer relationship management system,
the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology's academic management system, and One.
Tel's billing system. Researchers explained how these projects were catastrophic for their
organizations, primarily due to a severe lack of IT governance, which the researchers
dubbed managerial IT unconsciousness in a subsequent article:
"All three projects suffered from poor IT governance. Senior management in all
three organizations had not ensured that prudent checks and balances were in place to
enable them to monitor either the progress of the projects or the alignment and impact
of the new systems on their business. Proper governance, particularly with respect to
financial matters, auditing, and contract management, was not evident. Also, project-
level planning and control were notably absent or inadequate-with the result that proj-
ect status reports to management were unrealistic, inaccurate, and misleading."8
Chapter 2
62
The leadership style of the CIO plays a crucial role in gaining organizational commit-
ment to IT as well as motivation and support for IT workers. A survey found that 76 percent
of CIOs in companies in Europe, the Middle East, and Africa (EMEA) need to adapt their
leadership style to fully embrace digital business. "Command-and-control leadership doesn't
suit this digital world," said Dave Aron, vice president and Gartner Fellow. "In fact, it can be
an obstacle. Vision and inspiration are typically the most powerful attributes of digital lead-
ers. CIOs must accept to flip from 'control first' to vision first. In EMEA, 65 percent of CIOs
said that they need to decrease their time on commanding IT, while 45 percent of them said
they need to increase their visionary leadership."9
Empowering employees at all levels to effectively use IT is also crucial. For example,
Hilton Worldwide won a prestigious Customer Relationship Management (CRM) award
by enabling its employees to create their own solution for improving customer service
and loyalty. In addition to using the company's Satisfaction and Loyalty Tracking (SALT)
customer analytics software to deliver key information in a timely manner, team members
created a more personal process to focus on using data to improve the guest experience
called HEART: Hear the Guest; Empathize with the Guest; Apologize to the Guest; Resolve
the Issue; and Thank the Guest. By following this process along with timely data, Hilton
Worldwide dramatically increased its customer loyalty score, which leads to higher profits.10
The Need for Organizational Standards
Another problem in most organizations is a lack of standards or guidelines to follow when
performing project management. These standards or guidelines might be as simple as provid-
ing standard forms or templates for common project documents, examples of good project
management plans, or guidelines for how project managers should provide status information
to top management. The content of a project management plan and instructions for providing
status information might seem like common sense to senior managers, but many new IT proj-
ect managers have never created plans or created a nontechnical status report. Top manage-
ment must support the development of these standards and guidelines, and encourage or even
enforce their use. For example, an organization might require all potential project information
to be reported in a standard format to make project portfolio management decisions. If a proj-
ect manager does not submit a potential project in the proper format, it could be rejected.
As you saw in Chapter 1, some organizations invest heavily in project management
by creating a project management office or center of excellence, which assists project
managers in achieving project goals and maintaining project governance. Rachel Hollstadt,
founder and retired CEO of a project management consulting firm, suggests that organiza-
tions consider adding a new position, a Chief Project Officer (CPO). Some organizations
develop career paths for project managers; some require that all project managers have
Project Management Professional (PMP) certification and that all employees have some
type of project management training. The implementation of such standards demonstrates
an organization's commitment to project management.
Project and Product Life Cycles
Because projects operate as part of a system and involve uncertainty, it is good practice
to divide projects into several phases. The same can be said for developing products. This
section describes the various project and product life cycles.
The Project Management and Information Technology Context
63
Project Life Cycle
A project life cycle is a collection of project phases. Projects pass through these phases
from their start to their completion. The PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition describes the
generic life cycle to include the following four phases:
1. Starting the project
2. Organizing and preparing
3. Carrying out the work
4. Finishing the project
These phases should not be confused with the project management process groups of initi-
ating, planning, executing, monitoring and controlling, and closing, as described in Chapter 3.
In general, project life cycles define what work will be performed in each phase, what
deliverables will be produced and when, who is involved in each phase, and how manage-
ment will control and approve work produced in each phase. A deliverable is a product or
service, such as a technical report, a training session, a piece of hardware, or a segment
of software code, produced or provided as part of a project. (See Chapter 5, Project Scope
Management, for detailed information on deliverables.)
In early phases of a project life cycle, resource needs are usually lowest and the
level of uncertainty is highest. Project stakeholders have the greatest opportunity to
influence the final characteristics of the project's products, services, or results dur-
ing the early phases of a project life cycle. It is much more expensive to make major
changes to a project during latter phases. During the middle phases of a project life
cycle, the certainty of completing the project improves as it continues, and as more
information is known about the project requirements and objectives. Also, more
resources are usually needed than during the initial or final phase. The final phase of
a project focuses on ensuring that project requirements were met and that the project
sponsor approves completion of the project.
Product Life Cycles
Just as a project has a life cycle, so does a product. IT projects help develop products and
services such as new software, hardware, networks, research reports, and training on new
systems. A product life cycle is a process used to define, create, and deliver products.
Developing a product, such as a new information system, a car, a building, and so on, often
involves many projects.
All products follow some type of life cycle-cars, buildings, even amusement parks.
The Walt Disney Company, for example, follows a rigorous process to design, build, and
test new products. Disney assigns project managers to oversee the development of all new
products, such as rides, parks, and cruise lines. Likewise, major automotive companies
follow product life cycles to create new cars, trucks, and other products.
Most IT professionals are familiar with the concept of a product life cycle, especially
for developing software. Software development projects are one subset of IT projects.
Many IT projects involve researching, analyzing, and then purchasing and installing new
hardware and software with little or no actual software development required. However,
some projects involve minor modifications to enhance existing software or to inte-
grate one application with another. Other projects involve a major amount of software
Chapter 2
64
development. A systems development life cycle (SDLC) is a framework for describing the
phases of developing information systems.
The PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition briefly describes five product or development life
cycles. Two factors are important in deciding which life cycle to use: the degree of change
in requirements and the frequency of delivery of useful results. For example, for a product
with a low degree of change in requirements and low frequency of delivery, a predictive
life cycle would be appropriate.
1. Predictive life cycle: The scope, schedule, and cost are determined early,
and changes to scope are carefully managed. PMI also refers to predictive life
cycles as waterfall.
2. Iterative life cycle: The scope is determined early, but time and cost esti-
mates are modified as the understanding of the product increases. Iterations
are used to develop the product through a series of repeated cycles to add to
the functionality of the product. This approach works best when there is a
high degree of change and a low frequency of delivery.
3. Incremental life cycle: Deliverables are produced through a series of itera-
tions that add functionality within a set time frame. The deliverable is not
complete until after the final iteration. This approach works best when there
is a low degree of change and a high frequency of delivery.
4. Adaptive life cycle: Stakeholders define and approve the detailed scope
before the start of an iteration, producing a useable product at the end of
each iteration. PMI also refers to adaptive life cycles as agile or change-
driven. This approach works best when there is a high degree of change and a
high frequency of delivery.
5.
Hybrid life cycle: A combination of approaches is used based on the nature of the
work. For example, some deliverables might have a low degree of change and low
frequency of delivery such as weekly progress reports, a high degree of change
and a high frequency of delivery such as certain software features, and so on.
Many organizations today use a hybrid approach to product development where a predic-
tive set of steps is used as an overall means to coordinate more detailed steps that are adap-
tively managed. Predictive and adaptive approaches are not a mutually exclusive choice.
In addition to the waterfall model for the SDLC, other predictive life cycles include
the spiral model, the prototyping model, and the Rapid Application Development (RAD)
model. The project team spends a large portion of the project attempting to clarify the
requirements of the entire system and then producing a design. Users are often unable to
see any tangible results in terms of working software for an extended period. Below are
brief descriptions of several predictive SDLC models.11

The waterfall life cycle model has well-defined, linear stages of systems analy-
sis, design, construction, testing, and support. This life cycle model assumes
that requirements will remain stable after they are defined. The waterfall life
cycle model is used when risk must be tightly controlled and when changes
must be restricted after the requirements are defined. The waterfall approach
is used in many large-scale systems projects where complexity and cost
The Project Management and Information Technology Context
65
are so high that the more rigid steps of the approach help to ensure careful
completion of all deliverables. The waterfall approach also makes sense for IT
projects that do not involve software development, such as upgrading all the
routers and switches in a company to support VoIP phones.12

The spiral life cycle model was developed based on refinements of the water-
fall model as applied to large government software projects. It recognizes
the fact that most software is developed using an iterative or spiral approach
rather than a linear approach. The project team is open to changes and revi-
sions later in the project life cycle, and returns to the requirements phase to
more carefully clarify and design the revisions. This approach is suitable for
projects in which changes can be incorporated with reasonable cost increases
or with acceptable time delays. Figure 2-4 illustrates the differences between
the waterfall and spiral life cycle models.

The prototyping life cycle model is used for developing software prototypes
to clarify user requirements for operational software. It requires heavy user
involvement, and developers use a model to generate functional requirements
and physical design specifications simultaneously. Developers can throw away
or keep prototypes, depending on the project. This approach is often used
in systems that involve a great deal of user interface design, such as website
projects, in systems that automate previously manual functions, or in systems
that change the nature of how something is done, such as mobile applications.

The RAD life cycle model uses an approach in which developers work with
an evolving prototype. This life cycle model also requires heavy user involve-
ment and helps produce systems quickly without sacrificing quality. Develop-
ers use RAD tools such as CASE (computer-aided software engineering), JRP
(joint requirements planning), and JAD (joint application design) to facilitate
rapid prototyping and code generation. These tools are often used in reporting
Figure 2-4  Waterfall and spiral life cycle models
Implementation
Design
Analysis
Testing
Waterfall model
Spiral model
Analysis
Design
Construction
Testing
Support
Chapter 2
66
systems in which programmers enter parameters into software to generate
reports for user approval. When approved, the same parameters will generate
the final production system without further modification by the programmer.
The Importance of Project Phases and Management Reviews
Due to the complexity and importance of many IT projects and their resulting products, it
is important to take time to review the status of a project at each phase. A project should
successfully pass through each of the main project phases before continuing to the next.
Because the organization usually commits more money as a project continues, a manage-
ment review should occur after each phase to evaluate progress, potential success, and
continued compatibility with organizational goals.
Management reviews, called phase exits, phase gate reviews, or kill points, are very
important for keeping projects on track and determining if they should be continued,
redirected, or terminated. Recall that projects are just one part of the entire system of an
organization. Changes in other parts of the organization might affect a project's status, and
a project's status might likewise affect events in other parts of the organization. By break-
ing projects into phases, top management can make sure that the projects are still com-
patible with other needs of the organization.
Take another look at the opening case. Suppose Tom Walters' college conducted a
study sponsored by the college president on increasing the use of technology. At the end
of the concept phase, the project team could have presented information to the president,
faculty, and other staff members that described different options for increasing the use of
technology, an analysis of what competing colleges were doing, and results of a survey of
local stakeholders' opinions on the subject. This presentation at the end of the concept
phase represents one form of a management review. Suppose the study reported that
90 percent of surveyed students, faculty, and staff strongly opposed the idea of requiring
all students to have tablets, and that many adult students said they would attend other
colleges if they were required to pay for the additional technology. The college would
probably decide not to pursue the idea any further. Had Tom taken a phased approach,
he and his staff would not have wasted time and money developing detailed plans.
In addition to formal management reviews, it is important to have top management
involvement throughout the life cycle of most projects. It is unwise to wait until the end of
project or product phases to have management inputs. Many projects are reviewed by man-
agement on a regular basis, such as weekly or even daily, to make sure they are progressing
well. Everyone wants to be successful in accomplishing goals at work, and having management
involvement ensures that a company can accomplish its project and organizational goals.
W h a t W e n t R i g h t ?
Having specific deliverables and kill points at the end of project or product phases helps
managers make better decisions about whether to proceed, redefine, or kill a project.
Improvement in IT project success rates reported by the Standish Group has been due
in part to an increased ability to know when to cancel failing projects. Standish Group
The Project Management and Information Technology Context
67
The Context of Information Technology Projects
The project context has a critical impact on which product development life cycle will
be most effective for a particular software development project. Likewise, several issues
unique to the IT industry have a critical impact on managing IT projects. These include
the nature of projects, the characteristics of project team members, and the diverse
nature of technologies involved.
The Nature of IT Projects
Unlike projects in many other industries, IT projects are diverse. Some involve a small num-
ber of people installing off-the-shelf hardware and associated software. Others involve hun-
dreds of people analyzing several organizations' business processes and then developing new
software in a collaborative effort with users to meet business needs. Even for small hardware-
oriented projects, a wide diversity of hardware types can be involved-personal computers,
mainframe computers, network equipment, kiosks, laptops, tablets, or smartphones. The
network equipment might be wireless, cellular based, or cable based, or might require a sat-
ellite connection. The nature of software development projects is even more diverse than
Chairman Jim Johnson made the following observation: "The real improvement that I
saw was in our ability to-in the words of Thomas Edison-know when to stop beating a
dead horse. . . . Edison's key to success was that he failed fairly often; but as he said, he
could recognize a dead horse before it started to smell. . . . In information technology we
ride dead horses-failing projects-a long time before we give up. But what we are see-
ing now is that we are able to get off them; able to reduce cost overrun and time over-
run. That's where the major impact came on the success rate"13
Another example of the power of management oversight comes from Huntington
Bancshares, Inc. This company, like many others, has an executive steering committee, a
group of senior executives from various parts of the organization who regularly review impor-
tant corporate projects and issues. The Ohio-based, $26 billion bank holding company com-
pleted a year-long website redesign using XML technology to give its online customers access
to real-time account information as well as other banking services. The CIO, Joe Gottron,
said there were "four or five very intense moments" when the whole project was almost
stopped due to its complexity. The executive steering committee met weekly to review the
project's progress and discuss work planned for the following week. Gottron said the meet-
ings ensured that "if we were missing a beat on the project, no matter which company [was
responsible], we were on top of it and adding additional resources to make up for it."14
Some projects still go on for a long time before being killed. Blizzard, producer of
the popular massive multiplayer online (MMO) game World of Warcraft, decided to can-
cel the Titan game project after spending over seven years in development. According to
Blizzard co-founder and CEO Mike Morhaime, "We set out to make the most ambitious
thing that you could possibly imagine. And it didn't come together. We didn't find the
fun. We didn't find the passion. . . . We'd rather cut out a game we put a lot of time and
resources into than put out something that might. . . ." Chris Metzen, Blizzard's senior
vice president of story and franchise development, finished Morhaime's sentence: "
Damage the relationship. Smash the trust."15
Chapter 2
68
hardware-oriented projects. A software development project might include creating a simple,
stand-alone Microsoft Excel or Access application or a sophisticated, global e-commerce
system that uses state-of-the-art programming languages and runs on multiple platforms.
IT projects also support every possible industry and business function. Managing an
IT project for a film company's animation department requires different knowledge and
skills than a project to improve a federal tax collection system or to install a communica-
tion infrastructure in a third-world country. Because of the diversity of IT projects and the
newness of the field, it is important to develop and follow best practices in managing these
varied projects. Developing best practices gives IT project managers a common starting
point and method to follow with every project.
Characteristics of IT Project Team Members
Because IT projects are diverse, the people involved come from diverse backgrounds and
possess different skills. The resulting diverse project teams provide a significant advan-
tage because they can analyze project requirements from a more robust systems view.
Many companies purposely hire graduates with degrees in other fields such as business,
mathematics, or the liberal arts to provide different perspectives on IT projects. Even with
these different educational backgrounds, however, there are common job titles for people
working on most IT projects, such as business analyst, programmer, network specialist,
database analyst, quality assurance expert, technical writer, security specialist, hardware
engineer, software engineer, and system architect. Within the category of programmer,
several other job titles describe the specific technologies used, such as Java programmer,
PHP programmer, and C/C++/C# programmer.
Some IT projects require the skills of people in just a few job functions, but some
require inputs from many or all of them. Occasionally, IT professionals move between
these job functions, but more often people become technical experts in one area or they
decide to move into a management position. It is also rare for technical specialists or
project managers to remain with the same company for a long time. In fact, many IT
projects include a large number of contract workers. Working with this "army of free
agents," as author Rob Thomsett calls them, creates special challenges.
Diverse Technologies
Many of the job titles for IT professionals reflect the different technologies required
to hold those positions. Differences in technical knowledge can make communication
between professionals challenging. Hardware specialists might not understand the
language of database analysts, and vice versa. Security specialists may have a hard time
communicating with business analysts. People within the same IT job function often
do not understand each other because they use different technology. For example,
someone with the title of programmer can often use several different programming
languages. However, if programmers are limited in their ability to work in multiple
languages, project managers might find it more difficult to form and lead more versatile
project teams.
Another problem with diverse technologies is that many of them change rapidly.
A project team might be close to finishing a project when it discovers a new technology
The Project Management and Information Technology Context
69
that can greatly enhance the project and better meet long-term business needs. New
technologies have also shortened the time frame many businesses have to develop,
produce, and distribute new products and services. This fast-paced environment requires
equally fast-paced processes to manage and produce IT projects and products.
Recent Trends Affecting Information Technology
Project Management
Recent trends such as increased globalization, outsourcing, virtual teams, and agile project
management are creating additional challenges and opportunities for IT project managers
and their teams. Each of these trends and suggestions for addressing them are discussed in
this section.
Globalization
In his popular book The World Is Flat, Thomas L. Friedman describes the effects of
globalization, which has created a "flat" world where everyone is connected and the
"playing field" is level for many more participants.16 Lower trade and political barriers
and the digital revolution have made it possible to interact almost instantaneously with
billions of other people across the planet, and for individuals and small companies to
compete with large corporations. Friedman also discusses the increase in "uploading," in
which people share information through blogging, podcasts, and open-source software.
IT is a key enabler of globalization, as shown in the following statistics. Note that total
worldwide population was over 7.6 billion at the end of 2017.

"The internet has 3.5 billion users

There are 3.03 billion active social media users

91% of retail brands use 2 or more social media channels

81% of all small and medium businesses use some kind of social platform

Internet users have an average of 7.6 social media accounts

Social media users grew by 121 million between Q2 2017 and Q3 2017

That works out at a new social media user every 15 seconds

Facebook Messenger and Whatsapp handle 60 billion messages a day"17
Globalization has significantly affected the field of IT. Even though major IT
companies such as Microsoft and IBM started in the United States, much of their business
is global-indeed, companies and individuals throughout the world contribute to the
growth of information technologies, and work and collaborate on various IT projects.
It is important for project managers to address several key issues when working on
global projects:

Communications: Because people work in different time zones, speak
different languages, have different cultural backgrounds, and celebrate
different holidays, it is important to address how people will communicate in
an efficient and timely manner. A communications management plan is vital.
For details, see the plan described in Chapter 10, Project Communications
Management.
Chapter 2
70

Trust: Trust is an important issue for all teams, especially when they are
global teams. It is important to start building trust immediately by recogniz-
ing and respecting others' differences and the value they add to the project.

Common work practices: It is important to align work processes and
develop a modus operandi with which everyone agrees and is comfortable.
Project managers must allow time for the team to develop these common
work practices. Using special tools, as described next, can facilitate this
process.

Tools: IT plays a vital role in globalization, especially in enhancing
communications and work practices. Many people use free tools such
as Skype, Google Docs, or social media to communicate. Many project
management software tools include their own communications and
collaboration features in an integrated package. IBM continues to be the
leader in providing collaboration tools to businesses in over 175 companies,
followed by Oracle in 145 countries, SAP in 130 countries, and Microsoft in
113 countries.18 Work groups must investigate options and decide which tools
will work best for their projects. Security is often a key factor in deciding
which tools to use.
After researching over 600 global organizations, KPMG International summarized sev-
eral suggestions for managing global project teams:

Employ greater project discipline for global projects; otherwise, weaknesses
within the traditional project disciplines may be amplified by geographical
differences.

Think globally but act locally to align and integrate stakeholders at all project
levels.

Consider collaboration over standardization to help balance the goals and
project approach.

Keep momentum going for projects, which will typically have a long duration.

Consider the use of newer, perhaps more innovative, tools and technology.19
Outsourcing
As described in detail in Chapter 12, Project Procurement Management, outsourcing
is an organization's acquisition of goods and services from an outside source. The term
offshoring is sometimes used to describe outsourcing from another country. Offshoring
is a natural outgrowth of globalization. IT projects continue to rely more and more on
outsourcing, both within and outside their country boundaries.
Some organizations remain competitive by using outsourcing to their advantage.
Many organizations have found ways to reduce costs by outsourcing, even though the
practice can be unpopular in their home countries. For example, outsourcing was an
important topic in the 2012 U.S. Republican presidential debates, as candidates discussed
why Apple hires half a million low-paid workers in the Far East to assemble its products.
A New York Times article explained that outsourcing is not just about low costs. "One
former executive described how [Apple] relied upon a Chinese factory to revamp iPhone
The Project Management and Information Technology Context
71
manufacturing just weeks before the device was due on shelves. Apple had redesigned
the iPhone's screen at the last minute, forcing an assembly line overhaul. New screens
began arriving at the plant near midnight. A foreman immediately roused 8,000 workers
inside the company's dormitories, according to the executive. Each employee was given a
biscuit and a cup of tea, guided to a workstation and within half an hour started a 12-hour
shift fitting glass screens into beveled frames. Within 96 hours, the plant was producing
over 10,000 iPhones a day. 'The speed and flexibility is breathtaking,' the executive said.
'There's no American plant that can match that.'"20
Because of the increased use of outsourcing for IT projects, project managers need
to become more familiar with many global and procurement issues, including working on
and managing virtual teams.
Virtual Teams
Several factors, such as the cost and time required for travel or employee relocation,
the ability to communicate and work across vast distances, the advantages of hiring
people in locations that have a lower cost of living, and worker preferences for
flexible work hours, have contributed to a significant increase in virtual project
teams. A virtual team is a group of people who work together despite time and space
boundaries using communication technologies. Team members might all work for
the same company in the same country, or they might include employees as well as
independent consultants, suppliers, or even volunteers providing their expertise from
around the globe.
The main advantages of virtual teams include the following:

Lowering costs because many virtual workers do not require office space or
support beyond their home offices

Providing more expertise and flexibility or increasing competitiveness and
responsiveness by having team members across the globe working any time
of day or night

Improving the balance between work and life for team members by eliminat-
ing fixed office hours and the need to travel to work
G l o b a l I s s u e s
Outsourcing also has disadvantages. For example, Apple benefits from manufacturing
products in China, but it had big problems there after its iPhone 4S launch in
January 2012 caused fighting between migrant workers who were hired by scalpers to
stand in line to buy the phones. When Apple said it would not open its store in Beijing,
riots resulted and people attacked security guards. The Beijing Apple Store has had
problems before. In May 2011, four people were injured when a crowd waiting to buy the
iPad 2 turned ugly. Market analysts blamed Apple for not marketing or distributing its
products well in China.21 In 2017, Apple continued to have problems with China as sales
and market share there have been declining.
Chapter 2
72
Disadvantages of virtual teams include the following:

Isolating team members who may not adjust well to working in a virtual
environment

Increasing the potential for communications problems because team mem-
bers cannot use body language or other nonverbal communications to under-
stand each other and build relationships and trust

Reducing the ability for team members to network and transfer information
informally

Increasing the dependence on technology to accomplish work
Like any team, a virtual team should focus on achieving a common goal. Research on
virtual teams reveals a growing list of factors that influence their success:

Team processes: It is important to define how the virtual team will operate.
For example, teams must agree on how and when work will be done, what
technologies will be used, how decisions will be made, and other important
process issues.

Leadership style: The project manager's leadership style affects all teams,
especially virtual ones.

Trust and relationships: Many virtual teams fail because of a lack of trust.
It is difficult to build relationships and trust from a distance. Some project
managers like to have a face-to-face meeting so team members can get to
know each other and build trust. If such a meeting is not possible, phone or
video conferences can help.

Team member selection and role preferences: Dr. Meredith Belbin defined a team
role as "a tendency to behave, contribute and interrelate with others in a particu-
lar way."22 It is important to select team members carefully and to form a team in
which all roles are covered. All virtual team members must also understand their
roles on the team. (Visit www.belbin.com for more information on this topic.)

Task-technology fit: IT is more likely to have a positive impact on individual
performance if the capabilities of the technologies match the tasks that the
user must perform.

Cultural differences: It is important to address cultural differences, including
how people with authority are viewed, how decisions are made, how requests
or questions are communicated, and how workers prefer to operate (in col-
laboration or individually). These cultural differences vary from location to
location and affect many aspects of the team.

Computer-mediated communication: It is crucial to provide reliable and
appropriate computer-mediated communication to virtual team members,
including e-mail, instant messaging, text messaging, and chat rooms. If you
rely on these technologies to bring the virtual team together, you need to
ensure that they actually work, or you risk increasing the distance that can
exist across virtual boundaries.

Team life cycles: Just as projects and products have life cycles, so do teams.
Project managers must address the team life cycle, especially when assigning
team members and determining deliverable schedules.
The Project Management and Information Technology Context
73

Incentives: Virtual teams may require different types of incentives to
accomplish high-quality work on time. They do not have the benefit of physical
contact with their project managers or other team members, so it is important
to provide frequent positive incentives, such as a thank-you via e-mail or phone,
or even a bonus on occasion. Negative incentives, such as fines or withholding
payment, can also be effective if virtual team members are not being productive.

Conflict management: Even though they might never physically meet, virtual
teams still have conflicts. It is important to address conflict management, as
described in more detail in Chapter 9, Project Resource Management.
Several studies have tried to determine factors that are correlated positively to the
effectiveness of virtual teams. Research suggests that team processes, trusting relation-
ships, leadership style, and team member selection provide the strongest correlations to
team performance and team member satisfaction.23
Agile
Earlier the adaptive or agile approach to product development was discussed. Agile means
being able to move quickly and easily, but some people feel that project management, as
they have seen it used, does not allow people to work quickly or easily. Early software devel-
opment projects often used a waterfall approach, but as technology and businesses became
more complex, the approach often became difficult to use because requirements were
unknown or continuously changing. Agile today means using an approach where require-
ments and solutions evolve through collaboration. Agile can be used for software develop-
ment or in any environment in which the requirements are unknown or change quickly.
Interest in agile continues to increase in the project management community. The
PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition includes brief information describing considerations for
agile/adaptive environments for each knowledge area. The Standard for Project Management
includes an appendix called Agile, Iterative, Adaptive, and Hybrid Project Environments.
PMI also partnered with the Agile Alliance to publish the Agile Practice Guide in 2017.
It is interesting to note that PMI and many other sources now focus on organiza-
tional agility, not just specific agile techniques, like Scrum, described later in this section.
"Organizational agility is not just about being fast, it also implies the capacity to remain in
touch with customer needs. Transforming is much more than the technology going agile. It
is a change in mindset across the organization to focus on becoming adaptable and driving
business value to customers....People and processes are important for higher levels of agil-
ity, and culture is the key that unlocks agility's value."24
As emphasized in this chapter and hopefully throughout the text, projects are not
done in isolation. Project managers and their teams must use a systems view to make
their projects and their organizations successful.
The Manifesto for Agile Software Development
In the business world, the term agile was first applied to software development projects.
In February 2001, a group of 17 people that called itself the Agile Alliance developed and
agreed on the Manifesto for Agile Software Development, as follows:
Chapter 2
74
We are uncovering better ways of developing software by doing it and helping others
do it. Through this work we have come to value the following:

Individuals and interactions over processes and tools

Working software over comprehensive documentation

Customer collaboration over contract negotiation

Responding to change over following a plan25
The person or organization that implements Agile is responsible for interpreting and
applying the preceding values.
Some people associate Agile with specific techniques such as Scrum.
Scrum
According to the Scrum Alliance, Scrum is the leading agile development method for com-
pleting projects with a complex, innovative scope of work. The term was coined in 1986 in
a Harvard Business Review study that compared high-performing, cross-functional teams
to the Scrum formation used by rugby teams. The basic Scrum framework is summarized
in the following list and illustrated in Figure 2-5:

A product owner creates a prioritized wish list called a product backlog.

During sprint planning, the team pulls a small chunk from the top of that
wish list, a sprint backlog, and decides how to implement those pieces.

The team has a certain amount of time, a sprint, to complete its work-
usually two to four weeks-but meets each day to assess its progress (daily
Scrum).

Along the way, the ScrumMaster keeps the team focused on its goal.

At the end of the sprint, the work should be potentially shippable, as in
ready to hand to a customer, put on a store shelf, or show to a stakeholder.
Figure 2-5  Scrum framework
1. Product owner
creates
prioritized wish
list or backlog
Product
backlog
2. Project team
creates sprint
backlog
3. Teams have daily
Scrum meetings
during each 2-4
week sprint
4. Sprint results
in a useful
product
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
etc.
Sprint
review
Repeat steps 1-4
until complete
1.
2.
Sprint
backlog
Potentially
shippable
product
increment
Daily Scrum
Sprint
2-4
weeks
The Project Management and Information Technology Context
75

The sprint ends with a sprint review and retrospective.

As the next sprint begins, the team chooses another chunk of the product
backlog and begins working again.
The cycle repeats until enough items in the product backlog have been completed,
the budget is depleted, or a deadline arrives. Which of these milestones marks the end of
the work is entirely specific to the project. No matter which of these reasons stops work,
Scrum ensures that the most valuable work has been completed when the project ends.26
In the Axosoft video "Scrum in 10 Minutes," Hamid Shojaee, an experienced software
developer who has worked with several major corporations, briefly explains key concepts
like product backlogs, team roles, sprints, and burndown charts.27 Techniques from the
just-in-time inventory control method Kanban can be used in conjunction with Scrum.
Kanban was developed in Japan by Toyota Motor Corporation. It uses visual cues to guide
workflow. For example, teams can place cards on boards to show the status of work in
the backlog, such as new, in progress, and complete. Cards on the board are moved to the
right to show progress in completing work. Kanban also helps limit work in progress by
making a bottleneck visible so people can collaborate to solve problems that created the
bottleneck. Kanban helps improve day-to-day workflow, while Scrum provides the struc-
ture for improving the organization of projects.28 Scrum was initially applied to software
development projects, but today other types of projects use this technique to help focus
on teamwork, complete the most important work first, and add business value.
Agile, the PMBOK Guide, and a New Certification
The PMBOK Guide describes best practices for what should be done to manage proj-
ects. Agile is a methodology that describes how to manage projects. One could view Agile
and the Scrum framework as methods that break down a big project into several smaller
projects, defining the scope for each one. Project teams can have brief meetings each
day to decide how to get the most important work done first without calling the meetings
"Scrums."
As stated earlier in the chapter, several different methods are related to developing
information systems and other products. Because projects are unique, someone must
decide what processes are needed and how they should be performed. Project teams can
follow one specific process, a hybrid of several, or their own customized approach. Organi-
zations must also address the larger topic of organizational agility.
The Project Management Institute (PMI) recognized the increased interest in Agile, and
introduced a new certification in 2011 called Agile Certified Practitioner (ACP). As stated on
the PMI website in early 2018, "The PMI-ACP is our fastest growing certification, and it's
no wonder. Organizations that are highly agile and responsive to market dynamics complete
more of their projects successfully than their slower-moving counterparts-75 percent versus
56 percent-as shown in our 2015 Pulse of the Profession report."29 At the end of November
2017, there were 18,329 people who earned the ACP Certification.30
One reason for increased interest in Agile is the hope that it will somehow make
project management easier. Many books, courses, and consultants are capitalizing on
this "new" approach. However, seasoned project managers understand that they have
always had the option of customizing how they run projects. They also know that project
Chapter 2
76
management is not easy, even when using Agile. Organizations have also understood that
they need to strive for a culture that allows them to move quickly to succeed in a rapidly
changing world.
As you can see, working as an IT project manager or team member is an exciting and
challenging job. The excitement and challenge come from the focus on successfully com-
pleting projects that will have a positive impact on the organization as a whole.
C a s e W r a p - U p
When the Super Bowl ended, Tom told his friends how the tablet idea for his college was
killed. After several people voiced concerns about the idea at the faculty meeting, the
president of the college directed that a committee be created to formally review the con-
cept of requiring students to have tablets. Because the college was dealing with several
important enrollment-related issues, the president named the vice president of enroll-
ment to head the committee. Other people soon volunteered or were assigned to the
committee, including Tom Walters as head of Information Technology, the director of the
adult education program, the chair of the Computer Science department, and the chair
of the History department. The president also insisted that the committee include at
least two members of the student body. The president knew everyone was busy, and he
questioned whether the tablet idea was a high-priority issue for the college. He directed
the committee to present a proposal at next month's faculty meeting, either to recom-
mend creating a formal project team to fully investigate requiring tablets or to recom-
mend terminating the concept. At the next faculty meeting, few people were surprised
to hear the recommendation to terminate the concept. Tom Walters learned that he had
to pay much more attention to the needs of the entire college before proceeding with
detailed IT plans. Tom and his friends found several articles online about the NFL's use of
Microsoft Surface tablets. They laughed when they read about the Patriots refusing to use
them after a while and their coach smashing one on the sidelines. Tom said, "If Coach
Belichick had one at the end of this game, he would have smashed another one!"
The Project Management and Information Technology Context
77
Chapter Summary
Projects operate in an environment broader than the project itself. Project managers need to take
a systems approach in order to successfully manage projects; they need to consider projects
within the greater organizational context. To ensure project success, IT project managers need to
integrate business and organizational issues as well as technology into project planning.
Organizations have four different frames: structural, human resources, political, and symbolic.
Project managers need to understand all of these aspects of organizations to be successful.
The structural frame focuses on different groups' roles and responsibilities to meet the goals and
policies set by top management. The human resources frame focuses on producing harmony
between the needs of the organization and the needs of people. The political frame addresses
organizational and personal politics. The symbolic frame focuses on symbols and meanings.
The structure of an organization has strong implications for project managers, especially
regarding the amount of authority they have. The three basic organizational structures are
functional, matrix, and project. Project managers have the most authority in a pure project orga-
nization, an intermediate amount of authority in a matrix organization, and the least amount of
authority in a pure functional organization.
Organizational culture also affects project management. Projects are more likely to succeed
in a culture where employees have a strong identity with the organization, where work activities
emphasize groups, and where there is strong unit integration, high risk tolerance, performance-
based rewards, high conflict tolerance, an open-systems focus, and a balance among the
­dimensions of people focus, control, and means orientation.
Project stakeholders are individuals and organizations who are actively involved in the
project or whose interests may be positively or negatively affected by the project's execution or
successful completion. Project managers must identify and understand the different needs of all
stakeholders involved with their projects.
Top management commitment is crucial for project success. Because projects often affect
many areas in an organization, top management must assist project managers if they are to do a
good job of project integration. Organizational commitment to IT is also important to the success
of IT projects. Development standards and guidelines assist most organizations in managing
projects.
A project life cycle is a collection of phases. Traditional project phases include concept,
development, implementation, and close-out. Projects often develop products, which follow
­product life cycles. Project managers must understand the specific life cycles of their products as
well as the general project life cycle model.
A project should successfully pass through each project phase in order to continue to
the next phase. A management review should occur at the end of each project phase, and
more ­frequent management inputs are often needed. These management reviews and inputs
are important for keeping projects on track and determining if projects should be continued,
­redirected, or terminated.
Project managers need to consider several factors affected by the unique context of IT proj-
ects. The diverse nature of these projects and the wide range of business areas and technolo-
gies involved make IT projects especially challenging to manage. Leading project team members
Chapter 2
78
with a variety of specialized skills and understanding rapidly changing technologies are also
important considerations.
Several recent trends have affected IT project management. Increased globalization, out-
sourcing, virtual teams, and agile project management have changed the way many IT projects
are staffed and managed. Project managers must stay abreast of these and other trends and
discover ways to use them effectively.
Discussion Questions
1. What does it mean to take a systems view of a project? How does taking this view apply to
project management?
2. Explain the four frames of organizations. How can they help project managers understand
the organizational context for their projects?
3. Briefly explain the differences between functional, matrix, and project organizations.
Describe how each structure affects the management of a project.
4. Describe how organizational culture is related to project management. What type of culture
promotes a strong project environment?
5. Discuss the importance of top management commitment and the development of standards
for successful project management. Provide examples to illustrate the importance of these
items based on your experience on any type of project.
6. What are the phases in a traditional project life cycle? How does a project life cycle differ
from a product life cycle? Why does a project manager need to understand both?
7. What makes IT projects different from other types of projects? How should project managers
adjust to these differences?
8. Define globalization, outsourcing, virtual teams, and agile project management, and
describe how these trends are changing IT project management.
Quick Quiz
1. Which of the following is not part of the three-sphere model for systems management?
a.
Business
b.
Information
c.
Technology
d.
Organization
2. Which of the four frames of organizations addresses how meetings are run, employee dress
codes, and expected work hours?
a.
Structural
b.
Human resources
c.
Political
d.
Symbolic
The Project Management and Information Technology Context
79
3. Personnel in a ____________ organizational structure often report to two or more bosses.
a.
functional
b.
project
c.
matrix
d.
hybrid
4. Project work is most successful in an organizational culture where all of the following char-
acteristics are important except ____________.
a.
member identity
b.
group emphasis
c.
risk tolerance
d.
control
5. A ____________ is a product or service, such as a technical report, a training session,
or hardware, produced or provided as part of a project.
a.
deliverable
b.
product
c.
work package
d.
tangible goal
6. Which of the following statements is false?
a.
An analysis project life cycle is a collection of project phases.
b.
A product life cycle is the same as a project life cycle.
c.
The waterfall approach is an example of a predictive life cycle model.
d.
Agile is an example of an adaptive life cycle model.
7. Which of the following terms describes a framework of the phases involved in developing
information systems?
a.
Systems development life cycle
b.
Rapid application development
c.
Predictive life cycle
d.
Extreme programming
8. The nature of IT projects is different from the nature of projects in many other industries
because they are very ____________.
a.
expensive
b.
technical
c.
diverse
d.
challenging
Chapter 2
80
9. What term describes an organization's acquisition of goods and services from an outside
source in another country?
a.
Globalization
b.
Offshoring
c.
Exporting
d.
Global sourcing
10. ____________ is the leading agile development method.
a.
Extreme programming
b.
Sprint
c.
Kanban
d.
Scrum
Quick Quiz Answers
1. b; 2. d; 3. c; 4. d; 5. a; 6. b; 7. a; 8. c; 9. b; 10. d
Exercises
1. Summarize the three-sphere model for systems management in your own words. Then use
your own project experience or interview someone who recently completed an IT project,
and list several business, technology, and organizational issues addressed during the proj-
ect. Which issues were most important to the project, and why? Summarize your answers in
a short paper or presentation.
2. Apply the four frames of organizations to a possible project that involves the development
of a new technology like mobile banking, online retail, or social media. Work with two other
class members in a virtual environment on this exercise. Write a short paper or presenta-
tion that summarizes your analysis and opinions of how working virtually helped or hindered
your results.
3. Search the Internet for two interesting articles about software development life cycles,
including agile development. Review the website www.agilealliance.org. What do these
sources say about project management? Write a summary of your findings and opinions on
this topic, and cite your references.
4. Search the Internet and scan IT industry magazines or websites to find an example of an IT
project that had problems due to organizational issues. Write a short paper summarizing the
key stakeholders for the project and how they influenced the outcome.
5. Write a short summary of an article that discusses the importance of top management sup-
port for successful IT projects. Your summary should include your opinion on this topic.
The Project Management and Information Technology Context
81
6. Research the trend of using virtual teams. Review the information on team role theory from
www.belbin.com and other related sources. Write a summary of your findings, and cite at
least three references. Also include any personal experience and your opinion on the topic.
For example, what role(s) would you prefer to play on a team? Do you like working on virtual
teams? If you have not yet worked on one, how do you think it would be different from work-
ing on a face-to-face team?
7. Research the agile movement as it applies to software development and other types of proj-
ects. See how many books and websites are available on the topic. Is there evidence to show
that agile projects are more successful than others? What agile principles can be applied to
all types of projects? Write a short paper that summarizes your findings, and cite at least
three references. Also include any personal experience and your opinion on the topic.
8. Watch videos about Scrum and Kanban by Axosoft or other organizations. Summarize what
you learned and any questions you have in a short paper. Try to find answers to your ques-
tions and cite your sources.
9. Review the Opening and Closing case about Tom Walters tablet project. Also find at least
two articles about the NFL's adoption of tablets. Using the four frames of organizations
presented in this chapter, contrast the structural, human resource, political, and symbolic
frames as they relate to adopting tablets for Tom's college versus the NFL. What do you
think the main factors were in canceling Tom's project early versus continuing the NFL tablet
project?
Key Terms
agile
champion
deliverable
executive steering committee
functional organizational structure
human resources (HR) frame
IT governance
Kanban
kill point
matrix organizational structure
offshoring
organizational culture
outsourcing
phase gate review phase exit
political frame
politics
predictive life cycle
product life cycle
project life cycle
Project organizational structure
Scrum
structural frame
symbolic frame
systems analysis
systems approach
systems development life cycle (SDLC)
systems management
systems philosophy
systems thinking
virtual team
Chapter 2
82
Endnotes

1 Lee G. Bolman and Terrence E. Deal, Reframing Organizations (San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass, 1991).

2 Ibid.

3 John McManus and Trevor Wood-Harper, "A Study in Project Failure," BCS (June 2008).

4 Stephen P. Robbins and Timothy A. Judge, Organizational Behavior, 16th edition (Upper
Saddle River: Pearson/Prentice Hall, 2015).

5 USA Today, "NFL and Microsoft extend deal through next season" (December 1, 2017).

6 Tom Warren, "Microsoft defends its Surface NFL tablets after the Patriots stop using them,"
The Verge (October 21, 2016).

7 Peter Weill and Jeanne Ross, IT Governance: How Top Performers Manage IT Decision
Rights for Superior Results (Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 2004).

8 David Avison, Shirley Gregor, and David Wilson, "Managerial IT Unconsciousness,"
Communications of the ACM 49, no. 7 (July 2006), p.92.

9 Gartner, "Gartner Survey Reveals That 76 Percent of EMEA CIOs Must Change Their
Leadership Style to Succeed as a Digital Leader," press release (November 12, 2014).

10 Cynthia Clark, Elizabeth Glagowski, Thomas Hoffman, and Anna Papachristos, "Meet the
Winners," Gartner (2014).

11 Douglas H. Desaulniers and Robert J. Anderson, "Matching Software Development Life
Cycles to the Project Environment," Proceedings of the Project Management Institute
Annual Seminars & Symposium (November 1-10, 2001).

12 Ernest A. Edmonds, "A Process for the Development of Software for Non-Technical Users as
an Adaptive System," General Systems 19 (1974), pp. 215-218.

13 Jeannette Cabanis, "A Major Import: The Standish Group's Jim Johnson on Project
Management and IT Project Success," PM Network (PMI) (September 1998), p. 7.

14 Lucas Mearian, "Bank Hones Project Management Skills with Redesign," Computerworld
(April 29, 2002).

15 Philip Kollar, "Blizzard Cancels Its Next-Gen MMO Titan After Seven Years," Polygon
(September 23, 2014).

16 Thomas L. Friedman, The World Is Flat: A Brief History of the Twenty-First Century
(Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 2005).

17 Kit Smith, "Marketing: 105 Amazing Social Media Statistics and Facts," Brandwatch Blog
(November 18, 2017).

18 IBM, "IBM Leads in Collaboration and Building Exceptional Digital Experiences," www.ibm
.com (2014).

19 KPMG International, "Managing Global Projects: Observations from the Front-Line,"
www.kpmg.com (2007).
The Project Management and Information Technology Context
83

20 Charles Duhigg and Keith Bradsher, "How the U.S. Lost Out on iPhone Work," The New York
Times, www.nytimes.com/2012/01/22/business/apple-america-and-a-squeezed-middle-
class.html?_r=0 (January 21, 2012).

21 Sharon LaFraniere, "All iPhone Sales Suspended at Apple Stores in China," The New York
Times, www.nytimes.com/2012/01/14/technology/apple-suspends-iphone-4s-sales-in-
mainland-china-stores.html (January 13, 2012).

22 Belbin Team Roles in a Nutshell, www.belbin.com (accessed January 4, 2018).

23 Jeremy S. Lurey and Mahesh S. Raisinghani, "An Empirical Study of Best Practices in
Virtual Teams," Information & Management 38, no. 8 (2001), pp. 523-544.

24 Project Management Institute, "Achieving Greater Agility: The Vital Role of Culture and
Commitment" (November 2017).

25 Agile Manifesto, www.agilemanifesto.org.

26 Scrum Alliance, "The Scrum Framework in 30 Seconds," https://www.scrumalliance.org/
learn-about-scrum.

27 Hamid Shojaee, "Scrum in 10 Minutes," Axosoft (blog), www.axosoft.com (February 23,
2012).

28 Axosoft, "Intro to KanBan in Under 5 Minutes," YouTube (vlog), www.youtube.com/
watch?v=R8dYLbJiTUE (May 13, 2013).

29 The Project Management Institute, PMI Agile Certified Practitioner (PMI-ACP) (accessed
January 5, 2018).

30 Project Management Institute, PMI Today (January 2018).

C h a p t e r 3
The Project
Management
Process Groups
L e a r n i n g O b j e c t i v e s
After reading this chapter, you will be able to:

Describe the five project management process groups, the typical level
of activity for each, and the interactions among them

Relate the project management process groups to the project
management knowledge areas

Discuss how organizations develop information technology (IT) project
management methodologies to meet their needs

Review a case study of an organization applying the project
management process groups to manage an IT project, describe outputs
of each process group, and understand the contribution that effective
initiating, planning, executing, monitoring and controlling, and closing
make to project success

Review a case study of the same project managed with an agile focus
and compare the key differences between an agile approach and a
predictive approach

Describe several templates for creating documents for each process group
Chapter 3
86
Recall from Chapter 1 that project management consists of 10 knowledge areas:
integration, scope, schedule, cost, quality, resource, communications, risk,
procurement, and stakeholder management. Another important concept to understand
is that projects involve five project management process groups: initiating, planning,
executing, monitoring and controlling, and closing. Tailoring these process groups to
meet individual project needs increases the chance of success in managing projects.
This chapter describes each project management process group in detail through a
simulated case study based on JWD Consulting. It also includes samples of typical
project documents applied to this case. You can download templates for these and
other project documents from the Companion website for this text. Although you will
learn more about each knowledge area in Chapters 4 through 13, it is important first
to learn how they fit into the big picture of managing a project. Understanding how the
knowledge areas and project management process groups function together will lend
context to the remaining chapters.
Project Management Process Groups
Project management is an integrative endeavor. Decisions and actions taken in one
knowledge area at a certain time usually affect other knowledge areas. Managing these
interactions often requires making trade-offs among the project's scope, time, and cost-the
triple constraint of project management described in Chapter 1. A project manager may
also need to make trade-offs between knowledge areas, such as between managing risk and
resources. Consequently, you can view project management as a number of related processes.
O p e n i n g C a s e
Erica Bell is in charge of the Project Management Office (PMO) for her consulting firm,
JWD Consulting, which has grown to include more than 200 full-time consultants and
even more part-time consultants. JWD Consulting provides a variety of consulting
services to assist organizations in selecting and managing IT projects. The firm focuses
on finding and managing high-payoff projects and developing strong metrics to measure
project performance and benefits to the organization after the project is implemented.
The firm's emphasis on metrics and working collaboratively with its customers gives it
an edge over many competitors.
Joe Fleming, the CEO, wanted his company to continue to grow and become a
world-class consulting organization. Because the core of the business is helping other
organizations with project management, he felt it was crucial for JWD Consulting to
have an exemplary process for managing its own projects. He asked Erica to work with
her team and other consultants in the firm to develop several intranet site applications
that would allow them to share their project management knowledge. He also thought
that the firm should make some of the information available to the firm's clients. For
example, the firm could provide project management templates, tools, articles, links
to other sites, and an Ask the Expert feature to help build relationships with current
and future clients. Because JWD Consulting emphasizes the importance of high-payoff
projects, Joe also wanted to see a business case for this project before proceeding.
The Project Management Process Groups
87
A process is a series of actions directed toward a particular result. Project
management process groups progress from initiating activities to planning activities,
executing activities, monitoring and controlling activities, and closing activities. Recall
that a project can have different combinations of phases. One project might have concept,
development, implementation, and close-out phases, and another might have initial,
intermediate, and final phases. But all projects and all project phases need to include all
five process groups. You cannot equate process groups with project phases. For example,
project managers and teams need to reexamine the business need for the project, part
of monitoring and controlling activities, during every phase of the project life cycle to
determine if the project is worth continuing.

Initiating processes include defining and authorizing a project or project
phase. Initiating processes take place during each phase of a project. For
example, in the close-out phase, initiating processes are used to ensure that
the project team completes all the work, that someone documents lessons
learned, and that the customer accepts the work.

Planning processes include devising and maintaining a workable scheme to
ensure that the project addresses the organization's needs. Projects include
several plans, such as the scope management plan, schedule management
plan, cost management plan, and procurement management plan. These
plans define each knowledge area as it relates to the project at a particular
point in time. For example, a project team must develop a plan to define
the work needed for the project, to schedule activities related to that work,
to estimate costs for performing the work, and to decide what resources
to procure to accomplish the work. To account for changing conditions on
the project and in the organization, project teams often revise plans during
each phase of the project life cycle. The project management plan, which is
described in Chapter 4, coordinates and encompasses information from all
other plans.

Executing processes include coordinating people and other resources to
carry out the various plans and create the products, services, or results of
the project or phase. Examples of executing processes include directing and
managing project work, managing project knowledge, acquiring resources,
and conducting procurements.

Monitoring and controlling processes include regularly measuring and
monitoring progress to ensure that the project team meets the project
objectives. The project manager and staff monitor and measure progress
against the plans and take corrective action when necessary. A common
monitoring and controlling process is reporting performance, where project
stakeholders can identify any necessary changes that may be required to keep
the project on track.

Closing processes include formalizing acceptance of the project or project
phase and ending it efficiently. Administrative activities are often involved
in this process group, such as archiving project files, documenting lessons
learned, and receiving formal acceptance of the delivered work as part of the
phase or project.
Chapter 3
88
The process groups are not mutually exclusive. For example, project managers must
perform monitoring and controlling processes throughout the project's life span. That
is, monitoring and controlling processes occur concurrently throughout a project with
initiating, planning, executing, and closing processes. Initiating and planning processes
can occur concurrently with executing processes, and so on for each process group.
The level of activity and length of each process group varies for every project.
Normally, executing tasks require the most resources and time, followed by planning
tasks. Initiating and closing tasks are usually the shortest (at the beginning and end of a
project or phase, respectively), and they require the least resources and time. However,
every project is unique, so exceptions are possible.
You can apply the process groups for each major phase or iteration of a project, or you
can apply the process groups to an entire project. The first example of the JWD Consulting
case study applies the process groups to the entire project. The second example shows
how you can use a more agile approach to manage the same project; several process
groups are repeated for each iteration of the project.
Many people ask for guidelines on how much time to spend in each process group.
In his book Alpha Project Managers: What the Top 2 percent Know That Everyone Else
Does Not, Andy Crowe collected data from 860 project managers in various companies
and industries in the United States. He found that the best-the alpha-project managers
spent more time on every process group, except executing, than their counterparts as
shown in Figure 3-1. Notice that the alpha project managers spent almost twice as much
time on planning (21 percent versus 11 percent) as other project managers. Spending
more time on planning should lead to less time spent on execution, which should reduce
the time and money spent on projects. The best project managers know and practice this
important concept-do a good job of planning.1
Figure 3-1  Percentage of time spent on each process group
2%
Closing
Other Project Managers
Alpha Project Managers
Monitoring and Controlling
Executing
Planning
Initiating
3%
4%
5%
82%
69%
11%
21%
1%
2%
Spending more time
on planning should
pay off in execution
2%
Closing
Other Project Managers
Alpha Project Managers
Monitoring and Controlling
Executing
Planning
Initiating
3%
4%
5%
82%
69%
11%
21%
1%
2%
Spending more time
on planning should
pay off in execution
Source: Andy Crowe
The Project Management Process Groups
89
Each of the five project management process groups is characterized by the completion
of certain tasks. While initiating processes for a new project, the organization recognizes
that a new project exists and completes a project charter as part of this recognition. (See
Chapter 4 for more information on project charters.) Tables are provided later in this
chapter with detailed lists of possible outputs for each process group by knowledge area.
For example, Tables 3-3 through 3-7 list potential outputs for the initiating and planning
process groups. Samples of some outputs are provided for each process group in a case
study of JWD Consulting's project management intranet site project. Project managers and
their teams must decide which outputs are required for their particular projects.
Outputs of the planning process group include completing the project scope
statement, the work breakdown structure (WBS), the project schedule, and many other
items. Planning processes are especially important for IT projects. Anyone who has
ever worked on a large IT project that involves new technology knows the saying, "A
dollar spent up front in planning is worth one hundred dollars spent after the system is
implemented." Planning is crucial in IT projects because once a project team implements
a new system, considerable effort is needed to change it. Research suggests that companies
working to implement best practices should spend at least 20 percent of project time in
initiating and planning.4 This percentage is backed up by evidence from Alpha project
managers, as described earlier.
W h a t W e n t W r o n g ?
Many readers of CIO magazine commented on its cover story about problems with
information systems at the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS). The article described serious
problems the IRS has had in managing IT projects. They failed more than once in projects
attempted to modernize their aging systems. Philip A. Pell, PMP, believes that having a good
project manager and following a good project management process would help the IRS and
many organizations tremendously. Pell provided the following feedback to the article:
Pure and simple, good, methodology-centric, predictable, and repeatable project
management is the SINGLE greatest factor in the success (or in this case failure) of
any project. When a key stakeholder says, "I didn't know how bad things were," it
is a direct indictment of the project manager's communications management plan.2
The IRS continues to have serious problems in managing its aging IT infrastructure,
and lack of proper planning is still being questioned. The IRS spends $2.7 billion
annually on IT, with about 70 percent going toward legacy systems, such as the
Individual Master File written in the 1960s. The IRS maintains over 20 million lines
of assembly code. Their systems are key to collecting over $3 trillion in taxes. During
a House Ways and Means subcommittee in late 2017, Rep. Vern Buchanan told IRS
executives that he wanted to see a plan, including solid financial justification, for a
recent funding request. "The question is to have a plan, what is the return on that plan
in terms of the technology dollars being spent. . . . I'm big on planning, personally, as a
business guy, if you don't have a vision you perish."3
Chapter 3
90
The executing process group takes the actions necessary to complete the work
described in the planning activities. The main outcome of this process group is delivering
the actual work of the project. For example, if an IT project involves providing new
hardware, software, and training, the executing processes would include leading the
project team and other stakeholders to purchase the hardware, develop and test the
software, and deliver and participate in the training. The executing process group should
overlap the other process groups, and generally requires the most resources.
Monitoring and controlling processes measure progress toward the project objectives,
monitor deviation from the plan, and take corrective action to match progress with the
plan. Performance reports are common outputs of monitoring and controlling. The project
manager should be monitoring progress closely to ensure that deliverables are being
completed and objectives are being met. The project manager must work closely with
the project team and other stakeholders and take appropriate actions to keep the project
running smoothly. The ideal outcome of the monitoring and controlling process group
is to complete a project successfully by delivering the agreed-upon project scope within
time, cost, and quality constraints. If changes to project objectives or plans are required,
monitoring and controlling processes ensure that these changes are made efficiently and
effectively to meet stakeholder needs and expectations. Monitoring and controlling processes
overlap all of the other project management process groups because changes can occur at
any time.
During the closing processes, the project team works to gain acceptance of the
end products, services, or results and bring the phase or project to an orderly end. Key
outcomes of this process group are formal acceptance of the work and creation of closing
documents, such as a final project report and lessons-learned report.
M e d i a S n a p s h o t
Just as IT projects need to follow the project management process groups, so do other
projects, such as the production of a movie. Processes involved in making movies might
include screenwriting, producing, acting and directing, editing, and releasing the movie
to theaters. Many people enjoy watching the extra features on a DVD that describe
how these processes lead to the creation of a movie. For example, the DVD for Lord
of the Rings: The Two Towers Extended Edition includes detailed descriptions of how
the script was created, how huge structures were built, how special effects were made,
and how talented professionals overcame numerous obstacles to complete the project.
This material acted "not as promotional filler but as a serious and meticulously detailed
examination of the entire filmmaking process."5 New Line Cinema made history by
shooting all three Lord of the Rings films consecutively during one massive production.
It took three years of preparation to build the sets, find the locations, write the scripts,
and cast the actors. Director Peter Jackson said that the amount of early planning they
did made it easier than he imagined to produce the films. Project managers in any field
know how important it is to have good plans and to follow a good process. Jackson con-
tinued his movie making success by directing The Hobbit, produced as a film trilogy,
with movies released in 2012, 2013, and 2014.
The Project Management Process Groups
91
Mapping the Process Groups to the Knowledge Areas
You can map the main activities of each project management process group into the
10 project management knowledge areas. Table 3-1 provides a big-picture view of the
relationships among the 49 project management activities, the process groups in which
Table 3-1  Project management process group and knowledge area mapping
Project Management Process Groups
Knowledge
Area
Initiating
Process
Group
Planning
Process
Group
Executing
Process
Group
Monitoring
and
Controlling
Process
Group
Closing
Process
Group
4. Project
Integration
Management
4.1
Develop
Project
Charter
4.2 Develop Project
Management Plan
4.3 Direct and
Manage Proj-
ect Work
4.4 Manage
Project
Knowledge
4.5 Monitor
and Control
Project
Work
4.6 Perform
Integrated
Change
Control
4.7 Close
Project
or Phase
5. Project Scope
Management
5.1 Plan Scope
Management
5.2 Collect
Requirements
5.3 Define Scope
5.4 Create WBS
5.5 Validate
Scope
5.6 Control
Scope
6. Project
Schedule
Management
6.1 Plan Schedule
Management
6.2 Define Activities
6.3 Sequence
Activities
6.4 Estimate
Activity Durations
6.5 Develop
Schedule
6.6 Control
Schedule
7. Project Cost
Management
7.1 Plan Cost
Management
7.2 Estimate Costs
7.3 Determine
Budget
7.4 Control
Costs
(continued)
Chapter 3
92
Project Management Process Groups
Knowledge
Area
Initiating
Process
Group
Planning
Process
Group
Executing
Process
Group
Monitoring
and
Controlling
Process
Group
Closing
Process
Group
8. Project
Quality
Management
8.1 Plan Quality
Management
8.2 Manage
Quality
8.3 Control
Quality
9. Project
Resource
Management
9.1 Plan Resource
Management
9.2 Estimate Activ-
ity Resources
9.3 Acquire
Resources
9.4 Develop
Team
9.5 Manage
Team
9.6 Control
Resources
10. Project
Commu-
nications
Management
10.1 Plan
Communications
Management
10.2 Manage
Communica-
tions
10.3 Moni-
tor Commu-
nications
11. Project Risk
Management
11.1 Plan Risk
Management
11.2 Identify Risks
11.3 Perform
Qualitative Risk
Analysis
11.4 Perform
Quantitative Risk
Analysis
11.5 Plan Risk
Responses
11.6 Imple-
ment Risk
Responses
11.7 Moni-
tor Risks
12. Project
Procurement
Management
12.1 Plan Procure-
ment Management
12.2 Conduct
Procurements
12.3 Con-
trol Pro-
curements
13. Project
Stakeholder
Management
13.1
Identify
Stake-
holders
13.2 Plan Stake-
holder Engagement
13.3 Manage
Stakeholder
Engagement
13.4 Monitor
Stakeholder
Engagement
Source: Project Management Institute A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge
(PMBOK Guide) - Sixth Edition, Project Management Institute, Inc., (2017). Copyright and all
rights reserved. Material from this publication has been reproduced with the permission of PMI.
Table 3-1  Project management process group and knowledge area mapping (continued)
The Project Management Process Groups
93
they are typically completed, and the knowledge areas into which they fit. The activities
listed in the table are the main processes for each knowledge area listed in the PMBOK
Guide - Sixth Edition. Note that the PMBOK Guide can serve as a guide for all types of
projects that use all types of approaches, including Agile. It is up to each project team to
decide what processes and outputs are required based on their specific needs.
Several organizations use PMI's PMBOK Guide information as a foundation for
developing their own project management methodologies, as described in the next
section. Notice in Table 3-1 that many of the project management activities occur as part
of the planning process group. Because each project is unique, project teams are always
trying to do something that has not been done before. To succeed at unique and new
activities, project teams must do a fair amount of planning. Recall, however, that the most
time and money is normally spent on executing. It is good practice for organizations to
determine how project management will work best in their own organizations.
Developing an IT Project Management Methodology
Some organizations spend a great deal of time and money on training efforts for general
project management skills, but after the training, project managers may still not know how
to tailor their project management skills to the organization's particular needs. Because
of this problem, some organizations develop their own internal IT project management
methodologies. The PMBOK Guide is a standard that describes best practices for what
should be done to manage a project. A methodology describes how things should be done,
and different organizations often have different ways of doing things.
In addition to using the PMBOK Guide as a basis for project management
methodology, many organizations use other guides or methods, such as the following:

PRojects IN Controlled Environments (PRINCE2): Originally developed for
IT projects, PRINCE2 was released in 1996 as a generic project management
methodology by the U.K. Office of Government Commerce (OGC). It is the
de facto standard in the United Kingdom and is used in over 50 countries.
(See www.prince2.com for more information.) PRINCE2 defines 45 separate
subprocesses and organizes them into eight process groups as follows:
1. Starting up a project
2. Planning
3. Initiating a project
4. Directing a project
5. Controlling a stage
6. Managing product delivery
7. Managing stage boundaries
8. Closing a project

Agile methods: As described in Chapter 2, agile is an adaptive product
life cycle used when deliverables have a high degree of change and a high
frequency of delivery. The term agile is often used to describe a variety of
methods. For example, the Agile Practice Guide describes agile and Kanban
Chapter 3
94
as subsets of lean. (See Chapter 8, Project Quality Management, for more
details on lean.) Agile approaches include Scrum, Scrumban (hybrid of Scrum
and Kanban), Extreme Programming (XP), Feature Driven Development
(FDD), Crystal, Agile Unified Process (AUP), Dynamic System Development
Method (DSDM), and Scaled Agile Framework. See websites like www
.agilealliance.org and www.scaledagileframework.com for more information.
The second case in this chapter provides an example of using Scrum.
G l o b a l I s s u e s
In 2018 PMI published their tenth annual global project management survey (Pulse of the
Profession). Over 5,000 people participated, and respondents reported that 47 percent of
the projects completed in their organizations in the past year used a predictive approach,
23 percent used agile, 23 percent used a hybrid of predictive and agile, and 7 percent used
other approaches. Most organizations have adopted agile in at least some areas and are
mixing hybrid approaches across their project portfolios.6 In the 2015 survey, 27 percent
of respondents actually had a formal step of project evaluation where agile or Scrum was
overtly determined to be applicable or not to a given project situation.
A 2017 global survey conducted by VersionOne found that 94 percent of respondents
said their organizations practiced agile, but 60 percent of their teams were not yet prac-
ticing it. 80 percent of respondents also said their organization was at or below a "still
maturing" level with agile. The top three benefits of agile listed were the ability to man-
age changing priorities, increased team productivity, and improved project visibility.7

Rational Unified Process (RUP) framework: RUP is an iterative software
development process created by IBM that focuses on team productivity and
enables all team members to deliver software best practices to the organization.
According to RUP expert Bill Cottrell, "RUP embodies industry-standard
management and technical methods and techniques to provide a software
engineering process particularly suited to creating and maintaining component-
based software system solutions."8 Cottrell explained that you can tailor RUP to
include the PMBOK process groups because several customers asked for that
capability. IBM also developed an OpenSource method called OpenUP for the
delivery of agile projects. Several other project management methodologies are
used specifically for software development projects, such as Joint Application
Development (JAD) and Rapid Application Development (RAD).

Six Sigma methodologies: Many organizations have projects that use Six
Sigma methodologies. The work of many project quality experts contributed
to the development of today's Six Sigma principles. Two main methodologies
are used on Six Sigma projects: Define, Measure, Analyze, Improve, and
Control (DMAIC) is used to improve an existing business process, and Define,
Measure, Analyze, Design, and Verify (DMADV) is used to create new product
or process designs to achieve predictable, defect-free performance. (See
Chapter 8, Project Quality Management, for more information on Six Sigma.)
The Project Management Process Groups
95
Many organizations tailor a standard or methodology to meet their unique needs.
Even if organizations use the PMBOK Guide as the basis for their project management
methodology, they still have to do a fair amount of work to adapt it to their unique work
environment.
W h a t W e n t R i g h t ?
Organizations that excel in project management complete 89 percent of their projects
successfully compared to only 36 percent of organizations that do not have good project
management processes. PMI estimates that poor project performance costs over $109
million for every $1 billion invested in projects and programs.9
Very large, complex projects often benefit the most from using proven project
management methodologies. Several well-respected companies teamed up to bid on a multi-
billion dollar military health-record contract in 2015. IBM and Epic proposed running an
instance of the Epic health-record system (the most popular system on the market) on a
secure, IBM-operated data center. PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) worked with Google to
provide a solution based on an open-source version of the Vista health-record system used
by the Department of Veterans Affairs.10 The contract was awarded to the Leidos Partnership
for Defense Health-which includes Cerner, an electronic-health-records manager;
Accenture Federal; and Leidos, a government contractor based in Reston, Virginia. Their
MHS Genesis system has been implemented in many organizations by 2018. If this huge
contract is managed well, it will save taxpayers over $1.2 billion in potential wasted dollars.
The following sections present two examples of applying the project management
process groups to a project at JWD Consulting. Both examples use some of the ideas from
the PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition, some ideas from other methodologies, and some
new ideas to meet unique project needs. The first case study follows a more predictive or
waterfall approach, while the second case study follows a more adaptive approach using
Scrum. Even though they are tailored for JWD Consulting's organizational needs, they
both still use the project management process groups and several outputs or deliverables
described in the PMBOK Guide.
Case Study 1: JWD Consulting's Project Management
Intranet Site Project (Predictive Approach)
The following fictitious case provides an example of the elements involved in managing a
project from start to finish. This example also uses Microsoft Project to demonstrate how
project management software can assist in several aspects of managing a project. Several
templates illustrate how project teams prepare various project management documents.
Files for these and other templates are available on the Companion website for this text.
Details on creating many of the documents shown are provided in later chapters, so do
not worry if you do not understand everything right now. These two cases are provided to
give you a sense of the big picture of IT project management. You might want to read this
section again later to enhance your learning.
Chapter 3
96
Project Pre-Initiation and Initiation
In project management, initiating includes recognizing and starting a new project. An
organization should put considerable thought into project selection to ensure that it initiates
the right kinds of projects for the right reasons. It is better to have a moderate or even
small amount of success on an important project than huge success on a project that is
unimportant. The selection of projects for initiation is therefore crucial, as is the selection of
project managers. Ideally, the project manager would be involved in initiating a project, but
often the project manager is selected after many initiation decisions have already been made.
You will learn more about project selection in Chapter 4, Project Integration Management.
It is important to remember that strategic planning should serve as the foundation for
deciding which projects to pursue. The organization's strategic plan expresses the vision,
mission, goals, objectives, and strategies of the organization. It also provides the basis for
IT project planning. IT is usually a support function in an organization, so the people who
initiate IT projects must understand how those projects relate to current and future needs
of the organization. For example, JWD Consulting's main business is providing consulting
services to other organizations, not developing its own intranet site applications.
Information systems, therefore, must support the firm's business goals, such as providing
consulting services more effectively and efficiently.
An organization may initiate IT projects for several reasons, but the most important
reason is to support business objectives. As mentioned in the chapter's opening case, JWD
Consulting wants to follow an exemplary process for managing its projects because its
core business is helping other organizations manage projects. Developing an intranet to
share its project management knowledge could help JWD Consulting reduce internal costs
by working more effectively, and by allowing existing and potential customers to access
some of the firm's information. JWD Consulting could also increase revenues by bringing
in more business. Therefore, the firm will use these metrics-reducing internal costs and
increasing revenues-to measure its performance on this project.
Pre-Initiation Tasks
It is good practice to lay the groundwork for a project before it officially starts. Senior
managers often perform several tasks to lay the groundwork, sometimes called pre-
initiation tasks, including the following:

Determine the scope, time, and cost constraints for the project.

Identify the project sponsor.

Select the project manager.

Develop a business case for a project.

Meet with the project manager to review the process and expectations for
managing the project.

Determine if the project should be divided into two or more smaller projects.
As described in the opening case, the CEO of JWD Consulting, Joe Fleming, defined
the high-level scope of the project. He wanted to sponsor the project himself because it
was his idea and it was strategically important to the business. He wanted Erica Bell, the
PMO Director, to manage the project after proving there was a strong business case for
The Project Management Process Groups
97
1.0 Introduction/Background
JWD Consulting's core business goal is to provide world-class project management
consulting services to various organizations. The firm can streamline operations and
increase business by providing information related to project management on its intranet
site, making some information and services accessible to current and potential clients.
2.0 Business Objective
JWD Consulting's strategic goals include continuing growth and profitability. The
project management intranet site project will support these goals by increasing
visibility of the firm's expertise to current and potential clients by allowing client
and public access to some sections of the intranet. The project will also improve
profitability by reducing internal costs by providing standard tools, techniques,
templates, and project management knowledge to all internal consultants.
Table 3-2  JWD Consulting's business case
it. If there was a strong business case for pursuing the project, then Joe and Erica would
meet to review the process and expectations for managing the project. If there was not a
strong business case, the project would not continue.
As for the necessity of the last pre-initiation task, many people know from experience
that it is easier to successfully complete a small project than a large one, especially for IT
projects. It often makes sense to break large projects down into two or more smaller ones
to help increase the odds of success. In this case, however, Joe and Erica decided that the
work could be done in one project that would last about six months.
To justify investing in this project, Erica drafted a business case for it, getting input
and feedback from Joe, from one of her senior staff members in the PMO, and from a
member of the Finance department. She also used a corporate template and sample
business cases from past projects as a guide. Table 3-2 provides the business case. (Note
that this example and others are abbreviated.) Notice that the following information is
included in this business case:

Introduction/background

Business objective

Current situation and problem/opportunity statement

Critical assumptions and constraints

Analysis of options and recommendation

Preliminary project requirements

Budget estimate and financial analysis

Schedule estimate

Potential risks

Exhibits
Because this project is relatively small and is for an internal sponsor, the business
case is not as long as many other business cases. Erica reviewed the business case with
Joe, and he agreed that the project was definitely worth pursuing. He was quite pleased
(continued)
Chapter 3
98
Table 3-2  JWD Consulting's business case (continued)
3.0 Current Situation and Problem/Opportunity Statement
JWD Consulting has a corporate website as well as an intranet. The firm currently
uses the website for marketing information. The primary use of the intranet is
for consultant human resource information, such as entering hours on projects,
changing and viewing benefits information, and accessing an online directory
and Web-based e-mail system. The firm also uses an enterprise-wide project
management system to track all project information, focusing on the status of
deliverables and meeting scope, time, and cost goals. There is an opportunity to
provide a new section on the intranet dedicated to sharing consultants' project
management knowledge across the organization. JWD Consulting only hires
experienced consultants and gives them freedom to manage projects as they see
fit. However, as the business grows and projects become more complex, even
experienced project managers are looking for suggestions on how to work more
effectively.
4.0 Critical Assumptions and Constraints
The proposed intranet site must be a valuable asset for JWD Consulting. Current
consultants and clients must actively support the project, and it must pay for itself
within one year by reducing internal operating costs and generating new business. The
Project Management Office manager must lead the effort, and the project team must
include participants from several parts of the company, as well as from current client
organizations. The new system must run on existing hardware and software, and it
should require minimal technical support. It must be easily accessible by consultants
and clients and be secure from unauthorized users.
5.0 Analysis of Options and Recommendation
There are three options for addressing this opportunity:
1. Do nothing. The business is doing well, and we can continue to operate without
this new project.
2. Purchase access to specialized software to support this new capability with little
in-house development.
3. Design and implement the new intranet capabilities in-house, using mostly existing
hardware and software.
Based on discussions with stakeholders, we believe that option 3 is the best option.
6.0 Preliminary Project Requirements
The main features of the project management intranet site include the following:
1. Access to several project management templates and tools. Users must be able
to search for templates and tools, read instructions for using these templates and
tools, and see examples of how to apply them to real projects. Users must also be
able to submit new templates and tools, which should first be screened or edited
by the Project Management Office.
(continued)
The Project Management Process Groups
99
Table 3-2  JWD Consulting's business case (continued)
2. Access to relevant project management articles. Many consultants sense an infor-
mation overload when they research project management information. They often
waste time they should be spending with their clients. The new intranet should
include access to important articles on project management topics, which are
searchable by topic, and should allow users to ask the Project Management Office
staff to find additional articles to meet their needs.
3. Links to other, up-to-date websites, with brief descriptions of the main features of
the external sites.
4. An Ask the Expert feature to help build relationships with current and future
clients and share knowledge with internal consultants.
5. Appropriate security to make the entire intranet site accessible to internal
consultants and certain sections accessible to others.
6. The ability to charge money for access to some information. Some of the
information and features of the intranet site should prompt external users to pay
for the information or service. Payment options should include credit card or
similar online payment transactions. After the system verifies payment, the user
should be able to access or download the desired information.
7. Other features suggested by users, if they add value to the business.
7.0 Budget Estimate and Financial Analysis
A preliminary estimate of costs for the entire project is $140,000. This estimate is
based on the project manager working about 20 hours per week for six months and
other internal staff working a total of about 60 hours per week for six months. The
customer representatives would not be paid for their assistance. A staff project manager
would earn $50 per hour. The hourly rate for the other project team members would
be $70 per hour, because some hours normally billed to clients may be needed for this
project. The initial cost estimate also includes $10,000 for purchasing software and
services from suppliers. After the project is completed, maintenance costs of $40,000
are included for each year, primarily to update the information and coordinate the Ask
the Expert feature and online articles.
Projected benefits are based on a reduction in hours that consultants spend
researching project management information, appropriate tools, and templates. Projected
benefits are also based on a small increase in profits due to new business generated by
this project. If each of 400 consultants saved just 40 hours each year (less than one hour
per week) and could bill that time to projects that generate a conservative estimate of
$10 per hour in profits, then the projected benefit would be $160,000 per year. If the new
intranet increased business by just 1 percent, using past profit information, increased
profits due to new business would be at least $40,000 each year. Total projected benefits,
therefore, are about $200,000 per year. Exhibit A summarizes the projected costs and
benefits and shows the estimated net present value (NPV), return on investment (ROI),
and year in which payback occurs. It also lists assumptions made in performing this
preliminary financial analysis. All of the financial estimates are very encouraging. The
estimated payback is within one year, as requested by the sponsor. The NPV is $272,800,
and the discounted ROI based on a three-year system life is excellent at 112 percent.
(continued)
Chapter 3
100
to see that payback was estimated within a year and that the return on investment was
projected to be 112 percent. He told Erica to proceed with the formal initiation tasks for
this project, which are described in the next section.
Discount rate
8%
Assume the project is done in about 6 months
0
1
2
3
Total
Costs
Discount factor
Discounted costs
243,084
Beneﬁts
Discount factor
Discounted beneﬁts
515,419
Discounted beneﬁts - costs
Cumulative beneﬁts - costs
40,000
0.93
37,037
200,000
0.93
186,185
148,148
8,148
40,000
0.86
34,294
200,000
0.86
171,468
137,174
145,322
40,000
0.79
31,753
200,000
0.79
158,766
127,013
272,336
NPV
Payback in Year 1
Discounted life cycle ROI------------>
Assumptions
Costs
PM (500 hours, $50/hour)
Staff (1,500 hours, $70/hour)
Outsourced software and services
Total project costs (all applied in year 0)
Beneﬁts
# consultants
Hours saved
$/hour proﬁt
Beneﬁts from saving time
Beneﬁts from 1% increase in proﬁts
Total annual projected beneﬁts
Year
140,000
1
140,000
(140,000)
(140,000)
112%
# hours
25,000
105,000
10,000
400
40
10
160,000
40,000
200,000
140,000
0
0
1
10.0 Exhibits
Exhibit A: Financial Analysis for Project Management Intranet Site Project
Table 3-2  JWD Consulting's business case (continued)
8.0 Schedule Estimate
The sponsor would like to see the project completed within six months, but there is
some flexibility in the schedule. We also assume that the new system will have a useful
life of at least three years.
9.0 Potential Risks
This project carries several risks. The foremost risk is a lack of interest in the new
system by our internal consultants and external clients. User inputs are crucial for
populating information into this system and realizing the potential benefits from
using the system. There are some technical risks in choosing the type of software
used to search the system, implement security, process payments, and so on, but
the features of this system all use proven technologies. The main business risk
is investing the time and money into this project and not realizing the projected
benefits.
The Project Management Process Groups
101
Knowledge Area
Initiating Process
Outputs
Project Integration
Management
Develop project charter
Project charter
Assumption log
Project Stakeholder
Management
Identify stakeholders
Stakeholder register
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Source: PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition, 2017.
Table 3-3  Project initiation knowledge areas, processes, and outputs
Initiating
To officially initiate the project management intranet site project, Erica knew that the
main tasks were to identify all of the project stakeholders and to develop the project
charter. Table 3-3 shows these processes and their outputs, based on the PMBOK
Guide - Sixth Edition. The main outputs are a project charter and a stakeholder register.
Additional outputs that Erica found very useful for initiating projects were a stakeholder
management strategy and a formal project kick-off meeting. Descriptions of how these
outputs were created and sample documents related to each of them are provided
for this project. Recall that every project and every organization is unique, so not all
project charters, stakeholder registers, and other outputs will look the same. You will see
examples of several of these documents in later chapters.
Identifying Project Stakeholders
Erica met with Joe Fleming, the project's sponsor, to help identify key stakeholders. Recall
from Chapter 1 that stakeholders are people involved in project activities or affected by
them, and include the project sponsor, project team, support staff, customers, users, suppli-
ers, and even opponents to the project. Joe, the project sponsor, knew it would be important
to assemble a strong project team, and he was confident in Erica's ability to lead that team.
They decided that key team members should include one of their full-time consultants with
an outstanding record, Michael Chen; one part-time consultant, Jessie Faue, who was new
to the company and supported the Project Management Office; and two members of the IT
department who supported the current intranet, Kevin Dodge and Cindy Dawson. They also
knew that client inputs would be important, so Joe agreed to ask the CEOs of two of the
firm's largest clients if they would be willing to provide representatives to work on this proj-
ect at their own expense. All of the internal staff Joe and Erica recommended agreed to work
on the project, and the two client representatives were Kim Phuong and Page Miller. Because
many other people would be affected by this project as future users of the new intranet,
Joe and Erica also identified other key stakeholders, including their directors of IT, Human
Resources (HR), and Public Relations (PR), as well as Erica's administrative assistant.
After Joe and Erica made the preliminary contacts, Erica documented the
stakeholders' roles, names, organizations, and contact information in a stakeholder
register, a document that includes details related to the identified project stakeholders.
Chapter 3
102
Name
Position
Internal/
External
Project
Role
Contact Information
Joe Fleming
CEO
Internal
Sponsor
joe_fleming@jwdconsulting.com
Erica Bell
PMO
Director
Internal
Project
Manager
erica_bell@jwdconsulting.com
Michael
Chen
Senior
Consultant
Internal
Team
Member
michael_chen@jwdconsulting.com
Kim Phuong
Business
Analyst
External
Advisor
kim_phuong@client1.com
Louise Mills
PR Director
Internal
Advisor
louise_mills@jwdconsulting.com
Table 3-4  Stakeholder register
Table 3-4 provides an example of part of the initial stakeholder register. Because this
document would be public, Erica was careful not to include information that might
be sensitive, such as how strongly the stakeholders supported the project and their
potential influence on the project. She would keep these issues in mind discreetly and
use them in developing the stakeholder management strategy.
A stakeholder analysis is a technique that project managers can use to help
understand and increase the support of stakeholders throughout the project. Results of
the stakeholder analysis can be documented in a stakeholder register or in a separate
stakeholder management strategy. This strategy includes basic information such as
stakeholder names, level of interest in the project, level of influence on the project, and
potential management strategies for gaining support or reducing obstacles from each
stakeholder. Because much of this information can be sensitive, it should be considered
confidential. Some project managers do not even write down this information, but they
do consider it because stakeholder management is a crucial part of their jobs. Table 3-5
provides an example of part of Erica's stakeholder management strategy for the project
Name
Level of
Interest
Level of
Influence
Potential Management Strategies
Joe
Fleming
High
High
Joe likes to stay on top of key projects and make
money. Have a lot of short, face-to-face meetings
and focus on achieving the financial benefits of the
project.
Louise
Mills
Low
High
Louise has a lot of things on her plate, and she does
not seem excited about this project. She may be
looking at other job opportunities. Show her how
this project will help the company and her resume.
Table 3-5  Stakeholder management strategy
The Project Management Process Groups
103
management intranet site project. You will see other examples of documenting stakeholder
information in later chapters.
Drafting the Project Charter
Erica drafted a project charter and had the project team members review it before
showing it to Joe. Joe made a few minor changes, which Erica incorporated. Table 3-6
shows the final project charter. (Charters can include more details than are shown in
this example. See Chapter 4 for more information on project charters.) Note the items
included in the project charter and its short length. JWD Consulting believes that project
charters should be one or two pages long, and they may refer to other documents, such as
a business case, as needed. Erica felt that the most important parts of the project charter
were the signatures of key stakeholders (not included for brevity) and their individual
comments. It is hard to get stakeholders to agree on even a one-page project charter, so
everyone has a chance to make their concerns known in the comments section. Note that
Michael Chen, the senior consultant asked to work on the project, was concerned about
participating when he felt that his other assignments with external clients might have
a higher priority. He offered to have an assistant help as needed. The IT staff members
mentioned their concerns about testing and security issues. Erica knew that she would
have to address these concerns when managing the project.
Project Title: Project Management Intranet Site Project
Project Start Date: May 2                    Projected Finish Date: November 4
Budget Information: The firm has allocated $140,000 for this project. The majority
of costs for this project will be internal labor. An initial estimate provides a total of 80
hours per week.
Project Manager: Erica Bell, (310) 555-5896, erica_bell@jwdconsulting.com
Project Objectives: Develop a new capability accessible on JWD Consulting's
intranet site to help internal consultants and external customers manage projects
more effectively. The intranet site will include several templates and tools
that users can download, examples of completed templates and related project
management documents used on real projects, important articles related to recent
project management topics, an article retrieval service, links to other sites with
useful information, and an Ask the Expert feature, where users can post questions
about their projects and receive advice from experts in the field. Some parts of
the intranet site will be accessible free to the public, other parts will only be
accessible to current customers and internal consultants, and other parts will be
accessible for a fee.
Main Project Success Criterion: The project should pay for itself within one year of
completion.
Table 3-6  Project charter
(continued)
Chapter 3
104
Approach:

Develop a survey to determine critical features of the new intranet site and
solicit input from consultants and customers.

Review internal and external templates and examples of project management
documents.

Research software to provide security, manage user inputs, and facilitate the
article retrieval and Ask the Expert features.

Develop the intranet site using an iterative approach, soliciting a great deal of
user feedback.

Develop a way to measure the value of the intranet site in terms of reduced
costs and new revenues, both during the project and one year after project
completion.
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES (PARTIAL LIST)
Name
Role
Position
Contact Information
Joe Fleming
Sponsor
JWD Consulting,
CEO
joe_fleming@jwdconsulting.com
Erica Bell
Project
Manager
JWD Consulting,
manager
erica_bell@jwdconsulting.com
Michael Chen
Team
Member
JWD Consulting,
senior consultant
michael_chen@jwdconsulting.com
Jessie Faue
Team
Member
JWD Consulting,
consultant
jessie_faue@jwdconsulting.com
Kevin Dodge
Team
Member
JWD Consulting, IT
department
kevin_dodge@jwdconsulting.com
Cindy
Dawson
Team
Member
JWD Consulting, IT
department
cindy_dawson@jwdconsulting.com
Kim Phuong
Advisor
Client
representative
kim_phuong@client1.com
Page Miller
Advisor
Client
representative
page_miller@client2.com
Sign-Off: (Signatures of all the above stakeholders)
Comments: (Handwritten or typed comments from above stakeholders, if applicable)
"I will support this project as time allows, but I believe my client projects take priority. I will
have one of my assistants support the project as needed."-Michael Chen
"We need to be extremely careful-testing this new system,
especially the security in giving access to parts of the intranet
site to the public and clients."-Kevin Dodge and Cindy Dawson
Table 3-6  Project charter (continued)
The Project Management Process Groups
105
Holding a Project Kick-Off Meeting
Experienced project managers like Erica know that it is crucial to get projects off to a
great start. Holding a good kick-off meeting is an excellent way to do this. A kick-off
meeting is a meeting held at the beginning of a project so that stakeholders can meet each
other, review the goals of the project, and discuss future plans. The kick-off meeting is
often held after the business case and project charter are completed, but it could be held
sooner, as needed. Even if some or all project stakeholders must meet virtually, it is still
important to have a kick-off meeting.
Erica also knows that all project meetings with major stakeholders should include
an agenda. Figure 3-2 shows the agenda that Erica provided for the project management
intranet site project kick-off meeting. Notice the main topics in an agenda:

Meeting objective

Agenda (lists in order the topics to be discussed)

A section for documenting action items, who they are assigned to, and when
each person will complete the action

A section to document the date and time of the next meeting
Figure 3-2  Kick-off meeting agenda
[Date of Meeting]
Project Management Intranet Site Project
Chapter 3
106
It is good practice to focus on results of meetings, which is why a good agenda has
sections for documenting action items and deciding on the next meeting date and time. It
is also good practice to document meeting minutes, focusing on key decisions and action
items. Erica planned to send the meeting minutes to all meeting participants and other
appropriate stakeholders within a day or two after the meeting.
Project Planning
Planning is often the most difficult and unappreciated process in project management.
Because planning is not always used to facilitate action, many people view planning
negatively. The main purpose of project plans, however, is to guide project execution. To
guide execution, plans must be realistic and useful, so a fair amount of time and effort
must go into the planning process. People who are knowledgeable about the work need to
plan the work. Chapter 4, Project Integration Management, provides detailed information
on preparing a project management plan, and Chapters 5 through 13 describe planning
processes for each of the other knowledge areas.
Table 3-7 lists the project management knowledge areas, processes, and outputs of
project planning according to the PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition. If you plan to earn
PMP or CAPM certification, it will be helpful to study this table and similar ones
found in this chapter to understand the potential outputs of each process group. There
are many potential outputs from the planning process group, and every knowledge area
is included. Just a few planning documents from JWD Consulting's project management
intranet site project are provided in this chapter as examples, and later chapters
include many more examples.
Knowledge Area
Planning Process
Outputs
Project Integration
Management
Develop project
management plan
Project management plan
Project Scope
Management
Plan scope management
Scope management plan
Requirements management plan
Collect requirements
Requirements documentation
Requirements traceability matrix
Define scope
Project scope statement
Project documents updates
Create WBS
Scope baseline
Project documents updates
Project Schedule
Management
Plan schedule
management
Schedule management plan
Table 3-7  Planning processes and outputs
(continued)
The Project Management Process Groups
107
(continued)
Knowledge Area
Planning Process
Outputs
Define activities
Activity list
Activity attributes
Milestone list
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Sequence activities
Project schedule network diagrams
Project documents updates
Estimate activity
durations
Activity duration estimates
Basis of estimates
Project documents updates
Develop schedule
Schedule baseline
Project schedule
Schedule data
Project calendars
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Project Cost
Management
Plan cost management
Cost management plan
Estimate costs
Cost estimates
Basis of estimates
Project documents updates
Determine budget
Cost baseline
Project funding requirements
Project documents updates
Project Quality
Management
Plan quality management
Quality management plan
Quality metrics
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Project Resource
Management
Plan resource
management
Estimate activity
resources
Resource management plan
Team charter
Project document updates
Resource requirements
Basis of estimates
Resource breakdown structure
Project documents updates
Project
Communications
Management
Plan communications
management
Communications management plan
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Table 3-7  Planning processes and outputs (continued)
Chapter 3
108
Knowledge Area
Planning Process
Outputs
Project Risk
Management
Plan risk management
Identify risks

Perform qualitative risk
analysis
Perform quantitative risk
analysis
Plan risk responses
Risk management plan
Risk register
Risk report
Project documents updates
Project documents updates
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Project
Procurement
Management
Plan procurement
management
Procurement management plan
Procurement strategy
Bid documents
Procurement statement of work
Source selection criteria
Make or buy decisions
Independent cost estimates
Change requests
Project documents updates
Organizational process assets
updates
Project
Stakeholder
Management
Plan stakeholder
engagement
Stakeholder engagement plan
Source: PMBOK  Guide - Sixth Edition, 2017.
Table 3-7  Planning processes and outputs (continued)
Recall that the PMBOK Guide is only a guide, so many organizations may have
different planning outputs based on their particular needs, as is the case in this example.
You can also use many templates for planning; several are listed in the last section of this
chapter.
Because the project management intranet site project is relatively small,
Erica believes some of the most important planning documents to focus on are the
following:

A team charter, an output of project resource management planning

A project scope statement

A work breakdown structure, a key part of the scope baseline

A project schedule, in the form of a Gantt chart with all dependencies and
resources entered

A list of prioritized risks (part of a risk register)
All of these documents, as well as other project-related information, will be available
to all team members on a project website. JWD Consulting has used project websites for
The Project Management Process Groups
109
several years, and has found that they help facilitate communications and document
project information. For larger projects, JWD Consulting also creates many of the other
outputs listed in Table 3-7. (You will learn more about these documents by knowledge area
in the following chapters.)
Soon after the project team signed the project charter, Erica organized a team-
building meeting. An important goal of the meeting was helping the project team
members get to know each other. Erica had met and talked to each member separately,
but this was the first time the project team would spend much time together. Jessie
Faue worked in the Project Management Office with Erica, so they knew each other
well, but Jessie was new to the company and did not know any of the other team
members. Michael Chen was a senior consultant and often worked on the highest-
priority projects for external clients. He attended the meeting with his assistant, Jill
Anderson, who would support the project when Michael was too busy. Everyone valued
Michael's expertise, and he was extremely straightforward in dealing with people. He
also knew both of the client representatives from past projects. Kevin Dodge was JWD
Consulting's intranet guru, who tended to focus on technical details. Cindy Dawson
was also from the IT department and had experience working as a business consultant
and negotiating with outside suppliers. Kim Phuong and Page Miller, the two client
representatives, were excited about the project, but they were wary of sharing sensitive
information about their companies.
Erica knew that it was important to build a strong team and have everyone work well
together. She had all participants introduce themselves, and then she led an icebreaking
activity so everyone would be more relaxed. She asked all participants to describe their
dream vacations, assuming that cost was no issue. This activity helped everyone get to
know each other and show different aspects of their personalities.
Erica then explained the importance of the project, again reviewing the signed project
charter. She explained that an important tool to help a project team work together was
to have members develop a team charter that everyone felt comfortable signing. JWD
Consulting believed in using team charters for all projects to help promote teamwork and
clarify team communications. She explained the main topics covered and showed them
a team charter template. She then had the team members form two smaller groups, with
one consultant, one IT department member, and one client representative in each group.
These smaller groups made it easier for everyone to contribute ideas. Each group shared
its ideas for what should go into the charter, and then everyone worked together to form
one project team charter. Table 3-8 shows the resulting team charter, which took about
90 minutes to create. Erica could see that there were different personalities on this team,
but she felt they all could work together well.
Erica wanted to keep the team-building meeting to its two-hour time limit. The
next task would be to clarify the scope of the project by developing a project scope
statement and WBS. She knew it would take time and several future meetings to develop
these documents, but she wanted to get a feel for what everyone thought were the main
deliverables for this project, their roles in producing those deliverables, and what areas
of the project scope needed clarification. She reminded everyone what their budget and
schedule goals were so they would keep the goals in mind as they discussed the scope of
the project. She also asked each person to provide the number of hours he or she would
Chapter 3
110
Code of Conduct: As a project team, we will:

Work proactively, anticipating potential problems and working to prevent them.

Keep other team members informed of information related to the project.

Focus on what is best for the entire project team.
Participation: We will:

Be honest and open during all project activities.

Encourage diversity in team work.

Provide the opportunity for equal participation.

Be open to new approaches and consider new ideas.

Have one discussion at a time.

Let the project manager know well in advance if a team member has to miss a
meeting or may have trouble meeting a deadline for a given task.
Communication: We will:

Decide as a team on the best way to communicate. Because a few team
members cannot often meet face to face, we will use e-mail, a project website,
and other technology to assist in communicating.

Have the project manager facilitate all meetings and arrange for phone and
video conferences, as needed.

Work together to create the project schedule and enter actuals into the
enterprise-wide project management system by 4 p.m. every Friday.

Present ideas clearly and concisely.

Keep discussions on track.
Problem Solving: We will:

Encourage everyone to participate in solving problems.

Only use constructive criticism and focus on solving problems, not blaming
people.

Strive to build on each other's ideas.
Meeting Guidelines: We will:

Have a face-to-face meeting the first and third Tuesday morning of every month.

Meet more frequently the first month.

Hold other meetings as needed.

Record meeting minutes and send them via e-mail within 24 hours of all
project meetings, focusing on decisions made and action items from each
meeting.
Table 3-8  Team charter
be available to work on this project each month for the next six months. She then had
each person write answers to the following questions:
1. List one item that is most unclear to you about the scope of this project.
2. What other questions do you have or issues do you foresee about the scope of
the project?
The Project Management Process Groups
111
3. List what you believe to be the main deliverables for this project.
4. Which deliverables do you think you will help create or review?
Erica collected everyone's inputs. She explained that she would take this information
and work with Jessie to develop the first draft of the scope statement that she would
e-mail to everyone by the end of the week. She also suggested that they all meet again in
one week to develop the scope statement further and to start creating the WBS for the
project.
Erica and Jessie reviewed all the information and created the first draft of the scope
statement. At their next team meeting, they discussed the scope statement and got a good
start on the WBS. Table 3-9 shows a portion of the scope statement that Erica created
after a few more e-mails and another team meeting. Note that the scope statement lists
the product characteristics and requirements, summarizes the deliverables, and describes
project success criteria in detail.
Project Title: Project Management Intranet Site Project
Date: May 18
Prepared by: Erica Bell, Project Manager, erica_bell@jwdconsulting.com
Project Summary and Justification: Joe Fleming, CEO of JWD Consulting, requested
this project to assist the company in meeting its strategic goals. The new intranet site
will increase visibility of the company's expertise to current and potential clients. It will
also help reduce internal costs and improve profitability by providing standard tools,
techniques, templates, and project management knowledge to all internal consultants.
The budget for the project is $140,000. An additional $40,000 per year will be required
for operational expenses after the project is completed. Estimated benefits are
$200,000 each year. It is important to focus on the system paying for itself within one
year of its completion.
Product Characteristics and Requirements:
1. Templates and tools: The intranet site will allow authorized users to download
files they can use to create project management documents and to help them use
project management tools. These files will be in Microsoft Word, Excel, Access,
Project, or in HTML or PDF format, as appropriate.
2. User submissions: Users will be encouraged to e-mail files with sample templates
and tools to the Webmaster. The Webmaster will forward the files to the
appropriate person for review and then post the files to the intranet site, if desired.
3. Articles: Articles posted on the intranet site will have appropriate copyright
permission. The preferred format for articles will be PDF. The project manager may
approve other formats.
4. Requests for articles: The intranet site will include a section for users to ask
someone from the Project Management Office (PMO) at JWD Consulting to
research appropriate articles for them. The PMO manager must first approve the
request and negotiate payments, if appropriate.
Table 3-9  Scope statement draft
(continued)
Chapter 3
112
5. Links: All links to external sites will be tested on a weekly basis. Broken links will
be fixed or removed within five working days of discovery.
6. The Ask the Expert feature must be user-friendly and capable of soliciting
questions and immediately acknowledging that the question has been received in
the proper format. The feature must also be capable of forwarding the question to
the appropriate expert (as maintained in the system's expert database) and capable
of providing the status of questions that are answered. The system must also allow
for payment for advice, if appropriate.
7. Security: The intranet site must provide several levels of security. All internal
employees will have access to the entire intranet site when they enter their
security information to access the main, corporate intranet. Part of the intranet
will be available to the public from the corporate website. Other portions of the
intranet will be available to current clients based on verification with the current
client database. Other portions of the intranet will be available after negotiating a
fee or entering a fixed payment using pre-authorized payment methods.
8. Search feature: The intranet site must include a search feature for users to search
by topic and key words.
9. The intranet site must be accessible using a company-approved Internet browser.
Users must have appropriate application software to open several of the templates
and tools.
10. The intranet site must be available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, with one
hour per week for system maintenance and other periodic maintenance, as
appropriate.
Summary of Project Deliverables
Project management-related deliverables: Business case, project charter, team
charter, scope statement, WBS, schedule, cost baseline, progress reports, final project
presentation, final project report, lessons-learned report, and any other documents
required to manage the project.
Product-related deliverables:
1. Survey: Survey current consultants and clients to help determine desired content
and features for the intranet site.
2. Files for templates: The intranet site will include templates for at least
20 documents when the system is first implemented, and it will have the
capacity to store up to 100 documents. The project team will decide on the initial
20 templates based on survey results.
3. Examples of completed templates: The intranet site will include examples of
projects that have used the templates available on the site. For example, if there is
a template for a business case, there will also be an example of a real business case
that uses the template.
Table 3-9  Scope statement draft (continued)
(continued)
The Project Management Process Groups
113
4. Instructions for using project management tools: The intranet site will include
information on how to use several project management tools, including the
following as a minimum: work breakdown structures, Gantt charts, network
diagrams, cost estimates, and earned value management. Where appropriate,
sample files will be provided in the application software appropriate for the
tool. For example, Microsoft Project files will be available to show sample work
breakdown structures, Gantt charts, network diagrams, cost estimates, and
applications of earned value management. Excel files will be available for sample
cost estimates and earned value management charts.
5. Example applications of tools: The intranet site will include examples of real
projects that have applied the tools listed in number 4.
6. Articles: The intranet site will include at least 10 useful articles about relevant
topics in project management. The intranet site will have the capacity to store at
least 1,000 articles in PDF format with an average length of 10 pages each.
7. Links: The intranet site will include links with brief descriptions for at least 20
useful sites. The links will be categorized into meaningful groups.
8. Expert database: In order to deliver an Ask the Expert feature, the system must
include and access a database of approved experts and their contact information.
Users will be able to search for experts by predefined topics.
9. User Requests feature: The intranet site will include an application to solicit and
process requests from users.
10. Intranet site design: An initial design of the new intranet site will include a site
map, suggested formats, and appropriate graphics. The final design will incorporate
comments from users on the initial design.
11. Intranet site content: The intranet site will include content for the templates and
tools sections, articles section, article retrieval section, links section, Ask the
Expert section, User Requests feature, security, and payment features.
12. Test plan: The test plan will document how the intranet site will be tested, who will
do the testing, and how bugs will be reported.
13. Promotion: A plan for promoting the intranet site internally and externally will
describe various approaches for soliciting inputs during design. The promotion
plan will also announce the availability of the new intranet site.
14. Project benefit measurement plan: A project benefit plan will measure the financial
value of the intranet site.
Project Success Criteria: Our goal is to complete this project within six months for no
more than $140,000. The project sponsor, Joe Fleming, has emphasized the importance
of the project paying for itself within one year after the site is complete. To meet this
financial goal, the intranet site must have strong user inputs. We must also develop a
method for capturing the benefits while the intranet site is being developed and tested,
and after it is rolled out. If the project takes a little longer to complete or costs a little
more than planned, the firm will still view it as a success if it has a good payback and
helps promote the firm's image as an excellent consulting organization.
Table 3-9  Scope statement draft (continued)
Chapter 3
114
As the project team worked on the scope statement, it also developed the WBS
for the project. The WBS is a very important tool in project management because it
provides the basis for deciding how to do the work. The WBS also provides a basis for
creating the project schedule and for measuring and forecasting project performance.
Erica and her team decided to use the project management process groups as the
main categories for the WBS, as shown in Figure 3-3. They included completed work
from the initiating process to provide a complete picture of the project's scope. The
team members also wanted to list several milestones on their schedule, such as the
completion of key deliverables, so they prepared a separate list of milestones that
they would include on the Gantt chart. You will learn more about creating a WBS in
Chapter 5, Project Scope Management.
After preparing the WBS, the project team held another face-to-face meeting to
develop the project schedule, following the steps outlined in Section 2.5 of the WBS.
Several of the project schedule tasks are dependent on one another. For example, the
intranet site testing was dependent on the construction and completion of the content
tasks. Everyone participated in the development of the schedule, especially the tasks
on which each member would be working. Some of the tasks were broken down further
so the team members had a better understanding of what they had to do and when.
They also kept their workloads and cost constraints in mind when developing the
duration estimates. For example, Erica was scheduled to work 20 hours per week on
this project, and the other project team members combined should not spend more
than 60 hours per week on average for the project. As team members provided duration
estimates, they also estimated how many work hours they would spend on each task.
After the meeting, Erica worked with Jessie to enter all of the information
into Microsoft Project. Erica was using the intranet site project to train Jessie in
applying several project management tools and templates. They entered all of the
tasks, duration estimates, and dependencies to develop the Gantt chart. Their initial
inputs resulted in a completion date that was a few weeks later than planned. Erica
and Jessie reviewed the critical path for the project, and Erica had to shorten the
duration estimates for a few critical tasks to meet their schedule goal of completing
the project within six months. She talked to the team members working on those
tasks, and they agreed that they could plan to work more hours each week on those
tasks, if required, to complete them on time. Figure 3-4 shows the resulting Gantt
chart created in Microsoft Project. Only the executing tasks are expanded to show the
subtasks under that category. (You will learn how to use Project 2016 in Appendix A,
which is available on the Companion website for this text. Chapter 6, Project Schedule
Management, explains Gantt charts and other schedule management tools.)
The baseline schedule projects a completion date of November 1. Also notice that
there is only one delivery of the software, shown as a milestone near the end of the project,
on October 17. The project charter had a planned completion date of November 4. Erica
wanted to complete the project on time, and although three extra days was not much of
a buffer, she felt that the baseline schedule was realistic. She would do her best to help
everyone meet their deadlines.
Erica decided to enter the resource and cost information after reviewing the
schedule because the majority of the costs for this project were internal labor. Aware
The Project Management Process Groups
115
Figure 3-3  JWD Consulting intranet project work breakdown structure (WBS)
1.0 Initiating
1.2 Project charter
1.3 Kick-off meeting
2.0 Planning
2.1 Team planning meeting
2.2 Team charter
2.3 Scope statement
2.4 WBS
2.5 Schedule and cost baseline
2.5.1 Task resources
2.5.2 Task durations
2.5.3 Task dependencies
2.5.4 Draft Gantt chart
2.5.5 Final Gantt chart
2.6 Risk prioritization
3.0 Executing
3.1 Survey
3.2 User inputs
3.3 Intranet site content
3.3.1 Templates and tools
3.3.2 Articles
3.3.3 Links
3.3.4 Ask the Expert
3.3.5 User Requests feature
3.4 Intranet site design
3.5 Intranet site construction
3.6 Intranet site testing
3.7 Intranet site promotion
3.8 Intranet site roll-out
3.9 Project beneﬁts measurement
4.0 Monitoring and Controlling
4.1 Progress reports
4.2 Change requests
5.0 Closing
5.1 Final project report
5.2 Final project presentation
5.3 Lessons learned
1.1 Stakeholder identiﬁcation
Chapter 3
116
Figure 3-4  JWD Consulting intranet site project baseline Gantt chart
of the connection between time spent and cost on the project, the team kept its labor
hour constraints in mind when developing task duration estimates. Erica and Jessie
entered each project team member's name and labor rate in the resource sheet for their
Microsoft Project file. The client representatives were not being paid for their time, so
she left their labor rates at the default value of zero. Erica had also included $10,000 for
procurement in the financial analysis she prepared for the business case. She showed
Jessie how to enter that amount as a fixed cost split equally between the Ask the
Expert and User Requests features, because she thought they would have to purchase
external software and services for those. Erica then helped Jessie assign resources to
tasks, which involved entering the projected number of hours everyone planned to
work each week on each task. They then ran several cost reports and made a few minor
adjustments to resource assignments to make their planned total cost meet their budget
constraints. Their cost baseline was very close to their planned budget of $140,000.
The last deliverable her team needed to create within the planning process group
was a list of prioritized risks. As the project progresses, this information will be updated
and expanded in a risk register, which also includes information on root causes of the
risks, warning signs that potential risks might occur, and response strategies for the risks.
(See Chapter 11, Project Risk Management, for more information on risk registers.) Erica
reviewed the risks she had mentioned in the business case as well as the comments team
members made on the project charter and in their team meetings. She held a special
meeting for everyone to brainstorm and discuss potential risks. They listed all of the risks
they identified and then categorized them to analyze how likely (high, medium, or low
probability) each was and how big an impact (high, medium, or low) each could have.
Only one risk was in the high-probability and high-impact category, and several had
medium impact. They chose not to list the low-probability and low-impact risks. After
some discussion, the team developed the list of prioritized risks shown in Table 3-10.
The Project Management Process Groups
117
Ranking
Potential Risk
1
Lack of inputs from internal consultants
2
Lack of inputs from client representatives
3
Security of new system
4
Outsourcing/purchasing for the article retrieval and Ask the Expert
features
5
Outsourcing/purchasing for processing online payment transactions
6
Organizing the templates and examples in a useful fashion
7
Providing an efficient search feature
8
Getting good feedback from Michael Chen and other senior consultants
9
Effectively promoting the new system
10
Realizing the benefits of the new system within one year
Table 3-10  List of prioritized risks
Project Execution
Executing the project involves taking the necessary actions to complete the activities
in the project plan. The products of the project are created during project execution,
and it usually takes the most resources to accomplish this process. Table 3-11 lists the
knowledge areas, executing processes, and outputs of project execution from the PMBOK
Guide - Sixth Edition.
Many project sponsors and customers focus on deliverables related to providing the
products, services, or results desired from the project. However, it is equally important
to document change requests and update planning documents as part of execution.
Templates related to this process group are listed later in this chapter.
Erica knew that providing strong leadership and using good communication skills were
crucial to good project execution. For this relatively small project, she was able to work
closely with all the team members to make sure they were producing the desired work
results. She also used her networking skills to get input from other people in the firm and
from external sources at no additional cost to the project. She made sure that everyone
who would use the resulting intranet application understood what the team was producing
as part of the project and how the intranet application would help them in the future.
Erica also knew that working efficiently was critical for successful execution,
regardless of the size of the project. Therefore, she used resources throughout the
company when they were available. For example, she used the firm's formal change
request form, even though it had primarily been used for external projects. The firm also
had contract specialists and templates for several procurement documents that the project
team members would use for the portions of the project it planned to outsource.
Erica kept in mind that Joe, the CEO and project sponsor, liked to see work
performance data through milestone reports. He also wanted Erica to alert him to any
Chapter 3
118
Knowledge Area
Executing Process
Outputs
Project Integration
Management
Direct and manage
project work

Deliverables
Work performance data
Issue log
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Organizational process assets updates
Manage project
knowledge
Lessons-learned register
Project management plan updates
Organizational process assets updates
Project Quality
Management
Manage quality
Quality report
Test and evaluation documents
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Project Resource
Management
Acquire resources

Physical resource assignments
Project team assignments
Resource calendars
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Enterprise environmental factors
updates
Organizational process assets updates
Team performance assessments
Develop team
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Enterprise environmental factors updates
Organizational process assets updates
Manage team
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Enterprise environmental factors updates
Project
Communications
Management
Manage
communications
Project communications
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Organizational process assets updates
Table 3-11  Executing processes and outputs
(continued)
The Project Management Process Groups
119
Knowledge Area
Executing Process
Outputs
Project Risk
Management
Implement risk
responses
Change requests
Project documents updates
Project
Procurement
Management
Conduct
procurements
Selected sellers
Agreements
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Organizational process assets updates
Project
Stakeholder
Management
Manage stakeholder
engagement
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Organizational process assets updates
Source: PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition, 2017.
Table 3-11  Executing processes and outputs (continued)
potential issues or problems. Erica met with most of her project team members often,
and she talked to Joe about once a week to review progress on completing milestones and
to discuss any other project issues. Although Erica could have used project management
software to create milestone reports, she used word-processing software instead because
this project was small and she could more easily manipulate the report format. Table 3-12
shows a sample of a milestone report for the project management intranet site project that
Erica reviewed with Joe in mid-June.
Human resource issues often occur during project execution, especially conflicts. At
several of the team meetings, Erica could see that Michael seemed to be bored and often
left the room to make phone calls to clients. She talked to Michael about the situation,
and she discovered that Michael was supportive of the project, but he knew he could only
spend a minimal amount of time on it. He was much more productive outside of meetings,
so Erica agreed to have Michael attend a minimal number of project team meetings.
She could see that Michael was contributing to the team by the feedback he provided
and his leadership on the Ask the Expert feature for the intranet site. Erica adjusted her
communication style to meet his specific needs.
Another problem occurred when Cindy was contacting potential suppliers for software
to help with the Ask the Expert and User Requests features. Kevin wanted to write all
of the software for the project himself, but Cindy knew it made better business sense to
purchase these new software capabilities from a reliable source. Cindy had to convince
Kevin that it was worth buying some software from other sources.
Cindy also discovered that their estimate of $10,000 was only about half the amount
they needed for software services. She discussed the problem with Erica, explaining the
need for some custom development no matter which supplier they chose. Erica agreed
that they should go with an outside source, and she asked their sponsor to approve the
additional funds. Joe agreed, but he stressed the importance of still having the system pay
for itself within a year.
Chapter 3
120
Milestone
Date
Status
Responsible
Issues/
Comments
Initiating
Stakeholders
identified
May 2
Completed
Erica and Joe
Project charter
signed
May 10
Completed
Erica
Project kick-off
meeting held
May 13
Completed
Erica
Went very well
Planning
Team charter signed
May 13
Completed
Erica
Scope statement
completed
May 27
Completed
Erica
WBS completed
May 31
Completed
Erica
List of prioritized
risks completed
June 3
Completed
Erica
Reviewed with
sponsor and
team
Schedule and cost
baseline completed
June 13
Completed
Erica
Executing
Survey and analysis
completed
June 28
Erica
Poor response
so far!
Intranet site design
completed
July 26
Kevin
Project ben-
efits measurement
completed
August 9
Erica
User inputs
collected
August 9
Jessie
Articles completed
August 23
Jessie
Templates and tools
completed
September 6
Erica
Ask the Expert
completed
September 6
Michael
Table 3-12  Milestone report as of June 17
(continued)
The Project Management Process Groups
121
Milestone
Date
Status
Responsible
Issues/
Comments
User Requests
feature completed
September 6
Cindy
Links completed
September 13
Kevin
Intranet site
construction
completed
October 4
Kevin
Intranet site testing
completed
October 18
Cindy
Intranet site
promotion
completed
October 25
Erica
Intranet site roll-out
completed
October 25
Kevin
Monitoring and
Controlling
Progress reports
Every
Friday
All
Closing
Final project
presentation
completed
October 27
Erica
Sponsor sign-off on
project completed
October 27
Joe
Final project report
completed
October 28
Erica
Lessons-learned
reports submitted
November 1
All
Table 3-12  Milestone report as of June 17 (continued)
Even near the beginning of the project, Erica had tapped Joe for help when the team
received a low response rate to their survey and requests for user inputs. Joe sent an
e-mail to all of JWD Consulting's consultants describing the importance of the project. He
also offered five extra vacation days to the person who provided the best examples of how
they used tools and templates to manage their projects. Erica then received informative
input from the consultants. Having effective communication skills and strong top
management support are essential to good project execution.
Chapter 3
122
B e s t P r a c t i c e
One way to learn about best practices in project management is by studying
recipients of PMI's Project of the Year award. The Quartier International de Montréal
(QIM), Montreal's international district, was a 66-acre urban revitalization project
in the heart of downtown Montreal. This $90 million, five-year project turned a once
unpopular area into a thriving section of the city with a booming real estate market,
and has generated $770 million in related construction. Clement Demers, PMP, was
the director general for the QIM project. He said the team "took a unique project
execution approach by dividing work into packages that allowed for smaller-scale
testing of management techniques and contract awards. Benefiting from experience
gained in each stage, managers could then adjust future work segments and
management styles accordingly."11
Other strategies that helped the team succeed included the following:

The team identified champions in each stakeholder group to help inspire oth-
ers to achieve project goals.

The team's communications plan included a website dedicated to public
concerns.

There were two-day reviews at the beginning of each project phase to discuss
problems and develop solutions to prevent conflict.

Financial investors were asked for input to increase their stake in the
project.

The team recognized the value of hiring high-quality experts, such as
architects, engineers, lawyers, and urban planners. They paid all professionals
a fixed price for their services and paid their fees quickly.

Another Canadian firm won the Project of the Year award in 2014. The CA
$1.3 billion AP60 Phase 1 Project produced an upgraded aluminum smelting
facility in Jonquiere, Quebec. In 2013, the Adelaide desalination project in
Adelaide, Australia, won the award. This project, which supplies water during
times of drought, was completed early and within 1 percent of its AU$1.4
billion budget.12 The 2017 award went to the U.S. firm Washington River
Protection Solutions, LLC for their work on the Hanford Double Shell Tank
AY-102 Recovery Project. The project involved removing and transferring
nuclear waste to a double-shell tank for safe storage. The project closed ahead
of scheduled and over 8 percent under budget.13 See PMI's website for more
information on award criteria and winners.
Project Monitoring and Controlling
Monitoring and controlling is the process of measuring progress toward project objectives,
monitoring deviation from the current plan, and taking corrective action to match progress
with the current plan. Monitoring and controlling is done throughout the life of a project and
involves all 10 project management knowledge areas. Table 3-13 lists the knowledge areas,
monitoring and controlling processes, and outputs, according to the PMBOK Guide - Sixth
Edition. Templates related to this process group are listed later in this chapter.
The Project Management Process Groups
123
Knowledge Area
Monitoring and
Controlling Process
Outputs
Project Integration
Management
Monitor and control
project work

Work performance reports
Change requests
Project management plan
updates
Project documents updates
Perform integrated
change control
Approved change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Project Scope
Management
Validate scope

Accepted deliverables
Work performance information
Change requests
Project documents updates
Control scope
Work performance information
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Project Schedule
Management
Control schedule
Work performance information
Schedule forecasts
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Project Cost
Management
Control cost
Work performance information
Cost forecasts
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Project Quality
Management
Control quality
Quality control measurements
Verified deliverables
Work performance information
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Project Resource
Management
Control resources
Work performance information
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Table 3-13  Monitoring and controlling processes and outputs
(continued)
Chapter 3
124
Knowledge Area
Monitoring and
Controlling Process
Outputs
Project Communica-
tions Management
Monitor
communications
Work performance information
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Project Stakeholder
Management
Monitor stakeholder
engagement
Work performance information
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Project Risk
Management
Monitor risks
Work performance information
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Organizational process assets updates
Project Procurement
Management
Control
procurements
Closed procurements
Work performance information
Procurement documentation updates
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Organizational process assets updates
Source: PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition, 2017.
Table 3-13  Monitoring and controlling processes and outputs (continued)
On the project management intranet site project, several updates to the project
management plan were made to reflect changes made to the project scope, schedule, and
budget. Erica and other project team members took corrective action when necessary.
For example, when they were not getting many responses to their survey, Erica asked Joe
for help. When Cindy had trouble negotiating with a supplier, she got help from another
senior consultant who had worked with that supplier in the past. Erica also had to request
more funds for that part of the project.
Project team members submitted a brief progress report every Friday to show
work performance information. They were originally using a company template for
progress reports, but Erica found that by modifying the old template, she received
better information, which then helped her team work more effectively. She wanted team
members not only to report what they did but also to focus on what was going well or not
going well, and why. This extra information helped team members reflect on the project's
progress and identify areas in need of improvement. Table 3-14 is an example of one of
Cindy's progress reports.
The Project Management Process Groups
125
In addition to progress reports, an important tool for monitoring and controlling
the project was using project management software. All team members submitted their
actual hours worked on tasks each Friday afternoon by 4 p.m. via the firm's enterprise-
wide project management software. They were using the enterprise version of Microsoft
Project 2016, so they could easily update their task information via the Web. Erica worked
with Jessie to analyze the information, paying special attention to the critical path and
earned value data. (See Chapter 6, Project Schedule Management, for more information
on critical path analysis; Chapter 7, Project Cost Management, for a description of earned
value management; and Appendix A, available on the Companion website for this text,
for more information on using Project 2016 to help control projects.) Erica wanted to
Project Name: Project Management Intranet Project
Team Member Name: Cindy Dawson, cindy_dawson@jwdconsulting.com
Date: August 5
Work completed this week:
-Worked with Kevin to start the intranet site construction
-Organized all the content files
-Started developing a file naming scheme for content files
-Continued work on Ask the Expert and User Requests features
-Met with preferred supplier
-Verified that their software would meet our needs
-Discovered the need for some customization
Work to complete next week:
-Continue work on intranet site construction
-Prepare draft contract for preferred supplier
-Develop new cost estimate for outsourced work
What's going well and why:
The intranet site construction started well. The design was very clear and easy to fol-
low. Kevin really knows what he's doing.
What's not going well and why:
It is difficult to decide how to organize the templates and examples. Need more input
from senior consultants and clients.
Suggestions/Issues:
-Hold a special meeting to decide how to organize the templates and examples on the
intranet site.
-Get some sample contracts and help in negotiating with the preferred supplier.
Project changes:
I think we can stay on schedule, but it looks like we'll need about $10,000 more for out-
sourcing. That's doubling our budget in that area.
Table 3-14  Sample weekly progress report
Chapter 3
126
finish the project on time, even if it meant spending more money. Joe agreed with that
approach, and approved the additional funding Erica projected they would need based on
the earned value projections and the need to make up a little time on critical tasks.
Joe again emphasized the importance of the new system paying for itself within
a year. Erica was confident that they could exceed the projected financial benefits,
and she decided to begin capturing benefits as soon as the project team began testing
the system. When she was not working on this project, Erica was managing JWD
Consulting's Project Management Office (PMO), and she could already see how the
intranet site would help her staff save time and make their consultants more productive.
One of her staff members wanted to move into the consulting group, and she believed
the PMO could continue to provide its current services with one less person due to
this new system-a benefit Erica had not considered before. Several of the firm's client
contracts were based on performance and not hours billed, so she was excited to start
measuring the value of the new intranet site to their consultants as well.
Project Closing
The closing process involves gaining stakeholder and customer acceptance of the final
products and services and then bringing the project or project phase to an orderly end.
It includes verifying that all of the deliverables are complete, and it often includes a
final project report and presentation. Even though many IT projects are canceled before
completion, it is still important to formally close any project and reflect on what can be
learned to improve future projects. As philosopher George Santayana said, "Those who
cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it."14
It is also important to plan for and execute a smooth transition of the project
into the normal operations of the company. Most projects produce results that are
integrated into the existing organizational structure. For example, JWD Consulting's
project management intranet site project will require staff to support the intranet
site after it is operational. Erica included support costs of $40,000 per year for the
projected three-year life of the new system. She also created a transition plan as part
of the final report to provide for a smooth transition of the system into the firm's
operations. The plan included a list of issues that had to be resolved before the firm
could put the new intranet site into production. For example, Michael Chen would not
be available to work on the intranet site after the six-month project was complete, so
the team had to know who would support the Ask the Expert feature and plan some
time for Michael to work with that person.
Table 3-15 lists the knowledge areas, processes, and outputs of project closing
based on the PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition. During the closing processes of any
project, project team members must deliver the final product, service, or result of the
project and update organizational process assets, such as project files and a lessons-
learned report. If project team members procured items during the project, they must
formally complete or close out all contracts. Templates related to project closing are
listed later in this chapter.
Erica and her team prepared a final report, final presentation, and
lessons-learned report in closing the project. Erica reviewed the confidential,
individual lessons-learned reports from each team member and wrote one summary
The Project Management Process Groups
127
Knowledge Area
Closing Process
Outputs
Project Integration
Management
Close project or
phase
Project documents updates
Final product, service, or result transition
Final report
Organizational process assets updates
Source: PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition, 2017.
Table 3-15  Closing processes and output
Project Name:
JWD Consulting Project Management Intranet Site Project
Project Sponsor:
Joe Fleming
Project Manager:
Erica Bell
Project Dates:
May 2-November 4
Final Budget:
$150,000
Table 3-16  Lessons-learned report (abbreviated)
1. Did the project meet scope, time, and cost goals?
We did meet scope and time goals, but we had to request an additional $10,000,
which the sponsor approved.
2. What were the success criteria listed in the project scope statement?
Below is what we put in our project scope statement under project success criteria:
"Our goal is to complete this project within six months for no more than $140,000.
The project sponsor, Joe Fleming, has emphasized the importance of the project
paying for itself within one year after the intranet site is complete. To meet this
financial goal, the intranet site must have strong user input. We must also develop
a method for capturing the benefits while the intranet site is being developed and
tested, and after it is rolled out. If the project takes a little longer to complete or
costs a little more than planned, the firm will still view it as a success if it has
a good payback and helps promote the firm's image as an excellent consulting
organization."
(continued)
lessons-learned report to include in the final documentation, part of which is provided
in Table 3-16. Notice the bulleted items in the fourth question, such as the importance
of having a good kick-off meeting, working together to develop a team charter, using
project management software, and communicating well with the project team and
sponsor.
Erica also had Joe sign a client acceptance form, one of the sample templates on
the new intranet site that the project team suggested all consultants use when closing
Chapter 3
128
3. Reflect on whether you met the project success criteria.
As stated above, the sponsor was not too concerned about going over budget
as long as the system would have a good payback period and help promote our
firm's image. We have already documented some financial and image benefits
of the new intranet site. For example, we have decided that we can staff the
PMO with one less person, resulting in substantial cost savings. We have also
received excellent feedback from several of our clients about the new intranet
site.
4. What were the main lessons your team learned from managing this project?
The main lessons we learned include the following:

Having a good project sponsor was instrumental to project success. We ran
into a couple of difficult situations, and Joe was very creative in helping us
solve problems.

Teamwork was essential. It really helped to take time for everyone to get to
know each other at the kick-off meeting. It was also helpful to develop and fol-
low a team charter.

Good planning paid off in execution. We spent a fair amount of time
developing a good project charter, scope statement, WBS, schedules, and so
on. Everyone worked together to develop these planning documents, and there
was strong buy-in.

Project management software was very helpful throughout the project.
5. Describe one example of what went right on this project.
6. Describe one example of what went wrong on this project.
7. What will you do differently on the next project based on your experience working
on this project?
Table 3-16  Lessons-learned report (abbreviated) (continued)
their projects. (You can find this and other templates on the Companion website for
this text.)
Table 3-17 provides the table of contents for the final project report. The cover
page included the project title, date, and team member names. Notice the inclusion
of a transition plan and a plan to analyze the benefits of the system each year in the
final report. Also, notice that the final report includes attachments for all the project
management and product-related documents. Erica knew how important it was to
provide good final documentation on projects. The project team produced a hard copy
of the final documentation and an electronic copy to store on the new intranet site for
other consultants to use as desired.
Erica also organized a project closure luncheon for the project team right after the
final project presentation. She used the luncheon to share lessons learned and celebrate a
job well done.
The Project Management Process Groups
129
1. Project Objectives
2. Summary of Project Results
3. Original and Actual Start and End Dates
4. Original and Actual Budget
5. Project Assessment (Why did you do this project? What did you produce? Was the
project a success? What went right and wrong on the project?)
6. Transition Plan
7. Annual Project Benefits Measurement Approach
Attachments:
A  Project Management Documentation

Business case

Project charter

Team charter

Scope statement

WBS and WBS dictionary

Baseline and actual Gantt chart

List of prioritized risks

Milestone reports

Progress reports

Contract files

Lessons-learned reports

Final presentation

Client acceptance form
B  Product-Related Documentation

Survey and results

Summary of user inputs

Intranet site content

Intranet site design documents

Test plans and reports

Intranet site promotion information

Intranet site roll-out information

Project benefits measurement information
Table 3-17  Final project report table of contents
Case Study 2: JWD Consulting's Project Management
Intranet Site Project (Agile Approach)
This section demonstrates an agile approach to managing JWD Consulting's project
management intranet site project. Instead of repeating the sample documents shown in
the first, predictive case study, this section emphasizes the differences of using an agile
approach in each process group. Recall that an agile approach is often used for projects in
Chapter 3
130
which the business team cannot clearly express the scope early in the product life cycle,
but the team wants to provide a potentially shippable product earlier rather than later.
An agile project team typically uses several iterations or deliveries of software instead of
waiting until the end of the project to provide one product.
Note that teams do not normally make a snap decision about whether to manage a
project using an agile approach or not. Likewise, you don't just decide whether to take a plane
or a car on a long trip without specific logic. If you need to get somewhere quickly, have little
concern for sightseeing along the way, and have no problems with flying, you will probably
take a plane. If you want to take your time getting somewhere, see sights along the way, and
enjoy driving, you will take a car. Likewise, organizations should use logic to decide when to
use a predictive approach or an agile approach to managing specific projects. Projects with
heavy constraints, inexperienced and dispersed teams, large risks, generally clear up-front
requirements, and a fairly rigid completion date are best done using a predictive approach.
In contrast, projects with less rigid constraints, experienced and preferably co-located teams,
smaller risks, unclear requirements, and more flexible scheduling would be more compatible
with an agile approach. The same project is used in this section to highlight the main
differences between the processes and outputs of these two approaches.
When using agile techniques and its most popular method, Scrum, a team uses
specific roles, artifacts, and ceremonies.
Scrum Roles, Artifacts, and Ceremonies
Recall from Chapter 2 that Scrum includes three main roles for project participants:

Product owner: The person responsible for the business value of the project
and for deciding what work to do and in what order, as documented in the
product backlog. In this case, Joe Fleming is the product owner. He is the
CEO of JWD Consulting and the person who suggested the project.

ScrumMaster: The person who ensures that the team is productive, facilitates
the daily Scrum, enables close cooperation across all roles and functions, and
removes barriers that prevent the team from being effective. ScrumMasters
have authority over the process but not the people on the team. They must
be comfortable surrendering control to the product owner and team. Some
experts suggest that traditional project managers do not make great Scrum-
Masters. In this case, Erica Bell will take on the challenge and serve as the
ScrumMaster.

Scrum team or development team: A cross-functional team of five to nine
people who organize themselves and the work to produce the desired results
for each sprint. A sprint normally lasts two to four weeks, during which
specific work must be completed and made ready for review. Large projects
might require teams of teams. In this case, Michael Chen, Jessie Faue, Kevin
Dodge, Cindy Dawson, Kim Phuong, and Page Miller are development team
members. Their positions are listed in the project charter shown earlier in
Table 3-6. Kim and Page are client representatives who do not work for JWD
Consulting, but they are key team members, especially for developing the
parts of the intranet that external clients would use.
The Project Management Process Groups
131
In Scrum, an artifact is a useful object created by people. An artifact can be called
a deliverable in other project management approaches. The following three artifacts are
created with Scrum:

Product backlog: A list of features prioritized by business value. The
highest-priority items should be broken down in enough detail for the team
to estimate the effort involved in developing them. Some experts suggest
scheduling about 10 workdays for each item. Size and complexity of the work
dictates the estimate.

Sprint backlog: The highest-priority items from the product backlog to
be completed within a sprint. The Scrum team breaks down the highest-
priority items into smaller tasks that take about 12 to 16 hours to complete.
Examples of a sprint backlog and product backlog are provided later in this
section under Planning.

Burndown chart: Shows the cumulative work remaining in a sprint on a day-
by-day basis. An example burndown chart is provided later in this section
under Monitoring and Controlling.
The ScrumMaster facilitates four ceremonies or meetings when using Scrum methods:

Sprint planning session: A meeting with the team to select a set of work from
the product backlog to deliver during a sprint. This meeting takes about four
hours to a full day.

Daily Scrum: A short meeting for the development team to share progress
and challenges and plan work for the day. Ideally the team members are in
the same place, the meeting usually lasts no more than 15 minutes, and it
is held at the same time and place each day. If that is not possible, teams
can use videoconferencing to have short virtual meetings. The ScrumMaster
asks what work has been done since yesterday, what work is planned for
today, and what impediments or stumbling blocks might hamper the team's
efforts. The ScrumMaster documents these stumbling blocks and works with
key stakeholders to resolve them after the daily Scrum. Many teams use
the term issues for items that do not have to be solved in the next 24 hours
and blockers for items that need to be addressed immediately. This allows a
ScrumMaster to maintain focus on highest-priority items (blockers) first and
then manage the resolution of other issues over the next day or so.

Sprint reviews: A meeting in which the team demonstrates to the product
owner what it has completed during the sprint.

Sprint retrospectives: A meeting in which the team looks for ways to improve
the product and the process based on a review of the actual performance of
the development team.
Figure 3-5 displays how you can view the Scrum framework shown in Chapter 2
in terms of the project management process groups. Creating the product backlog,
developing the sprint backlog, and discussing plans during the daily Scrum would fall
under planning. Performing the daily work and sprint, and creating the potentially
shippable product increment would fit under executing. Holding the sprint review
Chapter 3
132
and discussing challenges as part of the daily Scrum can be viewed as monitoring and
controlling. Reflecting during the sprint retrospective would fit under closing. Initiating
the entire project is a phase that falls outside the Scrum framework in this example.
Table 3-18 summarizes some of the unique Scrum activities by each process group.
The following sections provide more detail on these activities.
Figure 3-5  Scrum framework and the process groups
1. Product owner
creates
prioritized wish
list or backlog
Planning
Product
backlog
2. Project team
creates sprint
backlog
3. Teams have daily
Scrum meetings
during each 2-4
week sprint
4. Sprint results
in a useful
product
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
etc.
Sprint
review
and
Sprint
retro-
spective
Repeat steps 1-4 until complete
1.
2.
Sprint
backlog
Potentially
shippable
product
increment
24
hours
Daily Scrum
Sprint
2-4
weeks
Executing
Closing
Monitoring and
controlling
Initiating:

Determine roles.

Decide how many sprints will compose each release and the scope of software
to deliver.
Planning:

Create product backlog.

Create sprint backlog.

Create release backlog.

Plan work each day in the daily Scrum.

Document stumbling blocks in a list.
Executing:

Complete tasks each day during sprints.

Produce a shippable product at the end of each sprint.
Table 3-18  Unique Scrum activities by process group
(continued)
The Project Management Process Groups
133
Project Pre-Initiation and Initiation
The main differences between pre-initiation in this case and the first case would be
determining roles and deciding what functionality would be delivered as part of each
release, how many sprints will be required to complete a release, and how many releases
of software to deliver. This is similar to dividing the project into several smaller projects.
A project charter, stakeholder register, stakeholder management strategy, and kick-off
meeting would still be created as part of initiation, just as they were in the predictive
version of this case. Using the Scrum roles, however, Joe Fleming would be the product
owner, Erica Bell the ScrumMaster, and the other people listed in the project charter
would be team members.
Joe met with Erica to discuss what functionality would be delivered in each release,
how many sprints would be needed for each release, how many software releases would
be required, and the approach required to complete the project. They realized that before
they could pin down functionality, releases, and sprints, they needed to survey potential
users to collect requirements for the new software and determine a way to measure the
value of the intranet site after it was implemented. They estimated that collecting and
analyzing information from potential users would take about two months.
Working together, Joe and Erica would create a survey that specifically asks potential
users which features would provide the most value. For example, instead of listing
general ideas, they would list specific features and have respondents rank them in order
of importance. They would also ask survey respondents to submit sample templates,
tools, and other useful information to Cindy Dawson, a project team member in the
IT department. Collecting this information up front would streamline the software
development process.
Joe and Erica decided that three software releases would be realistic, given the time
and cost constraints. Each sprint would be targeted to last four weeks, and reviews and
creation of the product and sprint backlogs would be an ongoing activity within each sprint.
Joe and Erica met with Cindy and other team members several times. Cindy had the
most experience working on agile projects. She discussed the importance of submitting
several graphical user interface designs to prospective users to gain their feedback. This
approach was extremely useful in the past, based on Cindy's experience, and it would
save a lot of rework during development. For example, a team member would create one
to four designs of a particular interface for prospective users to review in sessions hosted
Monitoring and Controlling:

Resolve issues and blockers.

Create and update burndown chart.

Demonstrate the completed product during the sprint review meeting.
Closing:

Reflect on how to improve the product and process during the sprint
retrospective meeting.
Table 3-18  Unique Scrum activities by process group (continued)
Chapter 3
134
by a marketing team. Cindy explained that the feedback would help lead to a better, more
intuitive user interface. Also, asking prospective users to rate the "look and feel" would
be very beneficial. Users may be distracted by a selected color scheme, for example,
so team members should craft the same interface in various color schemes to gauge
which one has the greatest appeal and generates the most positive usability score. Cindy
explained that user interface designers are not normally development team members,
but organizations might use them to provide detailed design specifications that provide a
consistent user interface. Erica and Joe learned a lot from Cindy and would incorporate
her recommendations into future plans.
Planning
Instead of creating a team charter, WBS, Gantt chart, and list of prioritized risks for the
whole project, the team follows the Scrum method. A preliminary scope statement for
the entire project can still be a useful tool for planning, even though the team knows that
more details will be added and changes will be made. Because Scrum implies that team
members work as a self-directed group, coached by the ScrumMaster, a team charter
should not be necessary.
In place of a WBS, high-level descriptions of the work to be completed would be
identified in the product and sprint backlogs. The team would develop a more detailed list
of technical stories and associated tasks to complete during each sprint. The team must
also establish a velocity (or capacity) estimate for each sprint based on team member
availability each day of the sprint. Estimates can be provided as hours of work, assuming
that all developers are contractors who can code eight hours per day. Estimates can also
be provided as points, assuming that developers are employees who code less than eight
hours per day. For example, six hours per day would equal a point, so 36 hours of effort
would equal 6 points.
A Gantt chart for the entire project could still be created, as shown in Figure 3-6. Notice
that the process groups do not follow a simple linear pattern. Several process groups are
repeated for each sprint, resulting in several releases of a usable software product, as shown
by the milestones. Recall that in the predictive version of this case, there was only one
release or delivery of software near the end of the project, on October 17. In this case, two
additional deliveries of software are scheduled, one on August 3 and one on September 11.
Some teams create a release road map, as described later in this section, for each software
release. The entire project is still scheduled for completion on November 1.
In addition to listing all of the preliminary project requirements in a scope
statement, as shown in section 6.0 of the business case (see Table 3-2), Joe, the
product owner, created a product backlog to prioritize the most important functions
of the new intranet software in terms of adding value to the business. Joe created the
product backlog after analyzing the survey results and discussing options with several
people. He included separate items for the most important templates and tools, instead
of grouping them in one item, and requested a point person from their firm's pool of
consultants to contact for questions about each template or tool as well. Notice that this
approach combined a few items in the scope statement shown in the first case to focus
on what would add the most value. Having a point person would be useful before the
team developed the more complex Ask the Expert feature. After reviewing the product
The Project Management Process Groups
135
backlog, the Scrum team would do its planning and update the sprint backlog based on
the items the team could complete in the first sprint. Table 3-19 provides an example of
the product backlog and a sprint backlog for the first sprint. The team would then have
its first daily Scrum meeting to plan the day.
The Scrum team breaks down the items in the sprint backlog into more specific
work items, often in the form of user stories, technical stories, and related tasks. User
stories are short descriptions written by customers of what they need a system to do
for them. These descriptions should be about three sentences long. They provide the
basis for time estimates for the sprint planning meeting. User stories should be testable
and small enough that programmers can complete and unit test their code in a timely
manner.
Developers break down user stories into technical stories. Then they use technical
stories to translate user requirements into the technical specifications necessary to create
the defined user functionality. The technical stories can contain one or more technical
tasks that developers use to chart progress on a sprint board as work is conducted
throughout a sprint. A task should fit within a day. One item in the sprint backlog may or
may not be documented in one user story, one technical story, and one task, based on its
complexity. There could be a one-to-one relationship or a many-to-one relationship if the
item is highly complex.
For example, someone in the finance area of the company could write a user story
called "Ability to charge customers for some intranet products and services." It might read
as follows: "As a financial manager, I want our site to use Company B to process payments
so that we save money on transaction and customer service costs." User stories are
broken down into a detailed technical story and then into tasks, similar to tasks in a WBS.
Figure 3-6  Intranet site project baseline Gantt chart using Scrum approach
Chapter 3
136
Some organizations use a release road map to lay out all the work for an entire
release, which can include more than one sprint. This road map is usually represented
as a chart consisting of several columns. The release road map provides a clear picture of
what stories (scope) will be contained in each sprint. This tool enables the Scrum team
to easily review and update velocity estimates versus actuals. A release road map should
be derived from data in the Project Management Information System (PMIS) or a related
agile management system, such as Microsoft's Team Foundation Server, Rally, VersionOne,
or JIRA.
Executing
As discussed earlier in this chapter, the most time and money should be spent on
executing, when plans are implemented to create the desired product. The team would
complete tasks each day, as it would in the predictive version of this case. But by using
an agile approach, the team would produce several iterations of a potentially shippable
product. For example, at the end of the first sprint, JWD Consulting would have some
functionality available on its new project management intranet site. Users would be
able to access templates, samples, and a point person for user stories, WBSs, and
project schedules, as listed in the first sprint backlog. Users would also be able to make
suggestions for functionality they would like to see in the intranet site as it was being
developed. The first iteration of the software would also provide the ability to charge
customers for some products and services. By using Scrum methods, the business could
benefit from these new features a few months earlier than they could using the predictive
approach described in the first case.
Product Backlog
Sprint Backlog
1. User story templates, samples, and
point person
2. WBS templates, samples, and point
person
3. Project schedule templates, samples,
and point person
4. Ability to charge customers for some
intranet products and services
5. Ability to collect user suggestions
6. Business case templates, samples,
and point person
7. Ask the Expert feature
8. Stakeholder management strategy
templates, samples, and point person
9. Risk register templates, samples, and
point person
10.  Etc.
1. User story templates, samples, and
point person
2. WBS templates, samples, and point
person
3. Project schedule templates, samples,
and point person
4. Ability to charge customers for some
intranet products and services
5. Ability to collect user suggestions
Table 3-19  Product and Sprint Backlogs
The Project Management Process Groups
137
Because Erica and some of the project team would be inexperienced in using Scrum,
they would have to work out several challenges. For example, communications are very
different because the project team meets every morning, physically or virtually. There
would also be communications issues with users of the new intranet site, who might be
confused by getting three iterations of the product instead of just one. See Chapter 10,
Project Communications Management, and Chapter 13, Project Stakeholder Management,
for additional information.
Monitoring and Controlling
The two main tools for monitoring and controlling in the Scrum framework are the
daily Scrum and the sprint review. Daily Scrums are held each morning to plan and
communicate work for the day and discuss any risks, issues, or blockers. The daily Scrum
includes a brief discussion of any issues and blockers the team is facing. The ScrumMaster
would work with the appropriate stakeholders to address these problems as part of
monitoring and controlling. Removing obstacles so the team can perform well is one of the
main job duties of the ScrumMaster. The ScrumMaster documents issues and blockers,
similar to a list of prioritized risks.
The work progress within a sprint can be represented on a sprint board maintained by
the ScrumMaster. The sprint board contains a card to represent each task to be worked on
during the sprint. Each task card contains the control number, task name, estimated time
to complete, rank or priority number, and team member assigned. As tasks are opened,
worked on, and closed, their cards are moved physically to the appropriate section on the
board. These sections include Not Started, In Progress, Ready to Test, Tested, and Closed.
Developers update the status of tasks in the Not Started, In Progress, and Ready to Test
sections. Testers update the status for tasks in the Tested section. The product owner is
responsible for reviewing functionality, confirming that it is working as expected, and
changing a task's status to Closed.
A burndown chart is an important artifact used to graphically display progress on each
sprint. The burndown chart in Figure 3-7 shows progress during the first sprint for the JWD
Consulting intranet project, which was scheduled to last four weeks and produce five items or
user stories listed in the sprint backlog. Remember that during planning, each user story was
broken down into specific tasks, and the team estimated how long it would take to complete
each task for each user story. During the daily Scrum meeting, the work a team member
claims should fit within a day. Each day, the team should again estimate the number of hours
or points remaining for each task. Some tasks might be added and some might be dropped
as the scope becomes clearer. It does not matter how many hours have been spent; what
matters is how many hours of work remain to complete the user stories for that sprint.
The burndown chart plots each day's sum of estimated hours or points remaining.
It also shows an idealized burndown line, as if the team were completing an equal
amount of work each day, or 10 tasks each day in this example. The chart then clearly
shows whether the team is doing well in that sprint or if there is potential for trouble.
Burndown charts help the team understand whether user stories might not be completed
within that sprint. The chart provides an indicator that stories are at risk and should be
removed. If progress is better than anticipated, the burndown chart can indicate that
stories should be added to the sprint.
Chapter 3
138
Figure 3-7  Burndown chart
0
50
100
150
200
Remaining
Ideal Velocity
Sprint 1 Burndown Chart
Days
Work to Complete
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
At the end of each sprint, the ScrumMaster-Erica in this example-leads the sprint
demonstration review meeting. The team demonstrates to the product owner what it
has completed during the sprint. In this case, Joe would review the five features created
during the first sprint. After the sprint demonstration review, he would update the product
backlog based on the latest information and business needs, and the next sprint cycle
would begin.
Closing
After the sprint review, the ScrumMaster leads a sprint retrospective. During this short
meeting (about half an hour), the team reflects on what happened during the sprint. The
ScrumMaster normally solicits team member feedback via e-mail first and collates these
results before the meeting. This saves time and focuses the discussion on items that are
most important. The retrospective is similar to a lessons-learned report, but it focuses on
a shorter period of time. The sprint retrospective is intended to answer two fundamental
questions:

What went well during the last sprint that we should continue doing?

What could we do differently to improve the product or process?
The sprint retrospective meeting is usually led by the ScrumMaster, who documents a
list of action items for implementation. Those items may be added to the product backlog
if the product owner agrees with them. For example, after the first sprint for the JWD
project management intranet site project, the team might suggest that the site be mobile
enabled. This new requirement could be added to the product backlog and selected as an
item for the next sprint. Recall that an agile approach welcomes new requirements as long
as they focus on business value.
The Project Management Process Groups
139
As demonstrated in the two cases on the same project, the agile approach and
predictive approach have similarities and differences. If done well, an agile method can
produce several releases of useful software. This approach allows the organization to work
together quickly to address changing business needs.
Templates by Process Group
As you can see, project teams prepare many documents throughout the life of a project.
Many people use templates to apply a standard format for preparing those documents.
Table 3-20 lists several templates used to prepare the documents shown in this chapter
and later chapters. The table lists the template name, chapter number, process group(s)
in which you normally use the template, the application software used to create it, and
the file name for the template. You can download these and additional templates in one
compressed file from the Companion website for this text or from the author's website at
www.kathyschwalbe.com. Feel free to modify the templates to meet your needs.
Template Name
Process Group
Chapter(s)
Where
Used
Application
Software
File Name
Business Case
Pre-initiating
3
Word
business case.doc
Business Case
Financials
Pre-initiating
3, 4
Excel
business case
financials.xls
Stakeholder
Register
Initiating
3, 13
Word
stakeholder register.doc
Table 3-20  Templates by process group
(continued)
A d v i c e f o r Y o u n g P r o f e s s i o n a l s
Most organizations have templates for many different kinds of documents. Be sure to ask
your boss, co-workers, and other colleagues for templates before trying to reinvent the
wheel. If you don't like the templates you find, look at other sources. If you can improve
them, share your work with others. No one wants to waste time creating project documents.
If you are doing work for outside sponsors, be sure to ask them for their templates. If they
don't have any or you think yours are better, be willing to share with them as well.
Templates are great, but completed templates with good information are even more
useful. Hopefully the examples in this chapter and throughout the text will help you in
creating good project documents. As you find good examples from other sources, try to
file them away for future reference.
Chapter 3
140
Template Name
Process Group
Chapter(s)
Where
Used
Application
Software
File Name
Stakeholder
Management
Strategy
Initiating
3, 13
Word
stakeholder manage-
ment strategy.doc
Kick-off Meeting
Agenda
Initiating
3
Word
kick-off meeting
agenda.doc
Payback Period
Chart
Initiating
4
Excel
payback period
chart.xls
Weighted
Scoring Model
Initiating
4, 12
Excel
weighted scoring
model.xls
Project Charter
Initiating
3, 4, 5
Word
charter.doc
Assumption Log
Initiating
3, 4
Excel
assumption log.xlsx
Team Charter
Planning
3, 9
Word
team charter.doc
Requirements
Traceability
Matrix
Planning
5
Word
requirements
traceability
matrix.doc
Scope
Statement
Planning
3, 4, 5
Word
scope statement.doc
Contract State-
ment of Work
Planning
12
Word
contract statement
of work.doc
Request for
Proposal
Planning
12
Word
request for proposal.
doc
Project Manage-
ment Plan
Planning
4
Word
project management
plan.doc
Work Break-
down Structure
(WBS)
Planning
3, 5, 6
Word
wbs.doc
WBS Dictionary
Entry
Planning
5
WBS dictionary
description.doc
Cost Estimate
Planning
7
Excel
cost estimate.xls
Earned Value
Chart
Monitoring and
Controlling
7
Excel
earned value chart.xls
Table 3-20  Templates by process group (continued)
(continued)
The Project Management Process Groups
141
Template Name
Process Group
Chapter(s)
Where
Used
Application
Software
File Name
Burndown
Chart
Monitoring and
Controlling
3, 7
Excel
burndownchart.xls
Quality Metrics
Executing
8
Word
quality metrics.doc
Pareto Chart
Monitoring and
Controlling
8
Excel
pareto chart.xls
Project Organi-
zational Chart
Planning,
Executing
9
Power-
Point
project organizational
chart.ppt
Responsibil-
ity Assignment
Matrix
Planning,
Executing
9
Excel
RACI chart.xls
Resource
Histogram
Planning,
Executing
9
Excel
resource histogram.xls
Communica-
tions Manage-
ment Plan
Planning
10
Word
communications
managemnt plan.doc
Lessons-learned
Register
Executing
4
Excel
lessons-learned
register.xlsx
Milestone Report
Executing
3, 6
Word
milestone report.doc
Change Request
Form
Planning,
Monitoring and
Controlling
4
Word
change request.doc
Performance
Report
Monitoring and
Controlling
3, 4
Word
performance report.doc
Probability/
Impact Matrix
Planning,
Executing,
Monitoring and
Controlling
11
Power-
Point
probability impact
matrix.ppt
Risk Register
Planning,
Monitoring and
Controlling
11
Excel
risk register.xls
Breakeven/Sen-
sitivity Analysis
Planning
11
Excel
breakeven.xls
Table 3-20  Templates by process group (continued)
(continued)
Chapter 3
142
The project management process groups-initiating, planning, executing, monitoring
and controlling, and closing-provide a useful framework for understanding project
management. They apply to most projects, both IT and non-IT, and along with the project
management knowledge areas, help project managers see the big picture of managing a
project in their organization.
Template Name
Process Group
Chapter(s)
Where
Used
Application
Software
File Name
Contract
Planning
12
Word
contract.doc
Request for
Proposal
Planning
12
Word
request for proposal
.doc
Issue Log
Monitoring and
Controlling
13
Word
issue log.doc
Customer
Acceptance
Form
Closing
10
Word
customer acceptance
form.doc
Lessons-
Learned Report
Closing
3, 10
Word
lessons-learned
report.doc
Final Project
Report Table of
Contents
Closing
3, 10
Word
final project report
table of contents.doc
Table 3-20  Templates by process group (continued)
The Project Management Process Groups
143
C a s e W r a p - U p
Erica Bell and her team finished the project management intranet site project on
November 4, as planned in their project charter. They went over budget, but Joe had
approved Erica's request for additional funds, primarily for purchasing external software
and customization. Like any project, they had a few challenges, but they worked
together as a team and used good project management to meet their sponsor's and users'
needs. They received positive initial feedback from internal consultants and some of
their clients on the new intranet site. People were asking for templates, examples, and
expert advice even before the system was ready. (If they had used an agile approach,
these features could have been delivered earlier.) About a year after the project was
completed, Erica worked with a member of the Finance department to review the
benefits of the new system. Although the Project Management Office lost one of its staff
members, it did not request a replacement because the new system helped reduce its
workload. This saved the firm about $70,000 a year for the salary and benefits of that
staff position. The team also had data to show that the firm saved more than $180,000
on contracts with clients because of the new system, compared with their projection of
$160,000. The firm was breaking even with the Ask the Expert feature during the first
year, and Erica estimated that the system provided $30,000 in additional profits the
first year by generating new business, instead of the $40,000 the team had projected.
However, savings from the PMO staff position salary and the extra savings on contracts
more than made up for the $10,000 difference. Joe was proud of the project team and
the system they produced to help make JWD Consulting a world-class organization.
Chapter 3
144
Chapter Summary
Project management involves a number of interlinked processes. The five project management
process groups are initiating, planning, executing, monitoring and controlling, and closing. These
processes occur at varying levels of intensity throughout each phase of a project, and specific
outcomes are produced as a result of each process. Normally the executing processes require
the most resources and time, followed by the planning processes. Spending adequate time in
planning pays off in execution.
Mapping the main activities of each project management process group into the 10 project
management knowledge areas provides a big picture of what activities are involved in project
management.
It is important to tailor project management methodologies to meet an organization's
particular needs. Some organizations develop their own IT project management methodologies,
often using the standards in the PMBOK Guide as a foundation. Popular methods like
PRINCE2, Agile, RUP, and Six Sigma include project management processes.
The JWD Consulting case study demonstrates how one organization managed an IT project
from start to finish. The case study provides samples of outputs produced for initiating, planning,
executing, monitoring and controlling, and closing:

Business case

Stakeholder register

Stakeholder management strategy

Project charter

Kick-off meeting agenda

Team charter

Work breakdown structure

Gantt chart

List of prioritized risks

Milestone report

Progress report

Lessons-learned report

Final project report
The second version of the same case study illustrates how to use Scrum, the leading agile
method, to manage the project. Instead of releasing the new intranet software just once near
the end of the project, the team could release three iterations of the software. This version of
the case study introduced some new tools, including a product backlog, sprint backlog, and
burndown chart. Later chapters provide detailed information for creating these and other project
management documents and using several of the tools and techniques described in both
versions of this case study.
The Project Management Process Groups
145
Discussion Questions
1. Briefly describe what happens in each of the five project management process groups
(initiating, planning, executing, monitoring and controlling, and closing). What types of
activities occur before initiating a project?
2. Approximately how much time do good project managers spend on each process group, and
why?
3. Why do organizations need to tailor project management concepts, such as those found in
the PMBOK Guide, to create their own methodologies?
4. What are some of the key outputs of each process group?
5. What are some of the typical challenges project teams face during each of the five process
groups? You can frame your discussion based on a project described in one of the feature
boxes in this chapter (e.g., the What Went Right? or What Went Wrong? feature). You can
also frame your discussion on one of PMI's Project of the Year Award winners or on a well-
known project failure like the Denver International Airport baggage handling system.
6. What are the main differences between the two versions of the JWD Consulting case study?
When should you use a more prescriptive or agile approach? Do you think users of the JWD
Consulting intranet site would prefer one release of the software or several incremental
ones? What are some pros and cons of each approach?
Quick Quiz
1. A ____________ is a series of actions directed toward a particular result.
a.
goal
b.
process
c.
plan
d.
project
2. ____________ processes include coordinating people and other resources to carry out
project plans and create the products, services, or results of the project or phase.
a.
Initiating
b.
Planning
c.
Executing
d.
Monitoring and controlling
e.
Closing
3. Which process group normally requires the most resources and time?
a.
Initiating
b.
Planning
c.
Executing
d.
Monitoring and controlling
e.
Closing
Chapter 3
146
4. What methodology was developed in the United Kingdom, defines 45 separate
subprocesses, and organizes them into eight process groups?
a.
Six Sigma
b.
RUP
c.
PMBOK Guide
d.
PRINCE2
5. Which of the following outputs is often completed before initiating a project?
a.
Stakeholder register
b.
Business case
c.
Project charter
d.
Kick-off meeting
6. A work breakdown structure, project schedule, and cost estimates are outputs of the
____________ process.
a.
initiating
b.
planning
c.
executing
d.
monitoring and controlling
e.
closing
7. Initiating involves developing a project charter, which is part of the project ____________
management knowledge area.
a.
integration
b.
scope
c.
communications
d.
risk
8. ____________ involves measuring progress toward project objectives and taking corrective
actions.
a.
Initiating
b.
Planning
c.
Executing
d.
Monitoring and controlling
e.
Closing
9. Which of the following is not a typical reason that project teams would use a predictive
approach versus an agile approach to managing a project?
a.
The project has unclear up-front requirements.
b.
The project team is inexperienced and dispersed.
c.
Large risks are involved.
d.
The completion date is fairly rigid.
The Project Management Process Groups
147
10. Many people use ____________ to have a standard format for preparing various project
management documents.
a.
methodologies
b.
templates
c.
project management software
d.
standards
Quick Quiz Answers
1. b; 2. c; 3. c; 4. d; 5. b; 6. b; 7. a; 8. d; 9. a; 10. b
Exercises
1. Study the WBS and Gantt charts provided in Figures 3-3 and 3-4. Enter the WBS into
Project 2016 or other project management software, indenting tasks as shown to create the
WBS hierarchy. Do not enter durations or dependencies. Print the resulting Gantt chart. See
the scope management section of Appendix A, available on the Companion website for this
text, for help using Project 2016.
2. Research a project management method, such as PRINCE2, Agile, RUP, or Six Sigma,
and how organizations use it, citing at least two references. Why do you think organizations
spend time and money tailoring a methodology to their environment? Write a summary of
your findings and your opinion on the topic.
3. Read the "ResNet Case Study," which is available from the Companion website for this
text under Chapter 3. This real case study about Northwest Airlines' reservation system
illustrates another application of the project management process groups. Write a paper
summarizing the main outputs produced during each project process group in this case.
Also, include your opinion of whether Peeter Kivestu was an effective project manager. If you
prefer, find another well-documented project and summarize it instead.
4. Review the sample documents provided for JWD Consulting to answer the following
questions. What was the success criteria for this project? What was the estimated
discounted life cycle ROI? Describe three key product-related deliverables. What were the
top three risks? Did the project meet scope, time, and cost goals? When were the shippable
products completed using the predictive approach and agile approach?
5. Read an article or watch a video about a recipient of PMI's Project of the Year award. Search
online for information from PMI's website. Write a one-page paper summarizing a winning
project, focusing on how the project manager and team used good project management
practices.
6. Review the product backlog, sprint backlog, and burndown chart provided in this chapter.
Read articles or watch a video about using a Scrum method that mentions these artifacts.
Write a short paper that describes more details about how to create these artifacts; cite at
least two references.
Chapter 3
148
7. You are a project consultant for the ACME Company and are helping to develop an agile
method using Scrum. The company has always used predictive project management
methods for software development, but company managers have heard that Agile can have
significant advantages if implemented properly. Prepare a proposal that suggests what
training, documentation, executive support, and team management approaches are needed
to start a pilot for Agile. Provide justification for your recommendations.
8. Review at least two surveys about the use of agile methodologies, such as the annual
survey on the state of agile by VersionOne. Also find a critical analysis of these surveys
as they are sponsored by companies that sell agile products or surveys. Summarize your
findings in a short paper.
9. Download the template files used in this text from the Companion website. Review several of
the files, and look at examples of how they are used in this text. Also search the Internet for
other template files. Write a short paper to summarize what you think about using templates
and how you think they can help project managers and their teams. Also discuss potential
problems with using templates.
Key Terms
agile methods
artifact
burndown chart
closing processes
daily Scrum
executing processes
initiating processes
kick-off meeting
methodology
monitoring and controlling processes
planning processes
process
product backlog
product owner
project management process groups
PRojects IN Controlled Environments
(PRINCE2)
Rational Unified Process (RUP) framework
ScrumMaster
Scrum team or development team
Six Sigma methodologies
sprint
sprint backlog
sprint planning session
sprint retrospectives
sprint reviews
stakeholder register
standard
user stories
End Notes

1 Andy Crowe, Alpha Project Managers: What the Top 2 percent Know That Everyone Else
Does Not (Atlanta, GA: Velociteach Press, 2006).

2 Phillip A. Pell, Comments posted at Elaine Varron, "No Easy IT Fix for IRS" [formerly "For
the IRS, There's No EZ Fix"], CIO.com (April 1, 2004).
The Project Management Process Groups
149

3 Meredith Somers, "A 'sense of urgency' as IRS legacy IT systems grow increasingly older,"
Federal News Radio (October 5, 2017).

4 PCI Group, "PM Best Practices Report" (October 2001).

5 Brian Jacks, "Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers Extended Edition (New Line)," Under-
ground Online, UGO.com (accessed August 4, 2004).

6 Project Management Institute, "Pulse of the Profession: Success in Disruptive Times"
(2018).

7 Version One Inc., "11th Annual State of Agile Survey," VersionOne.com (2017).

8 Bill Cottrell, "Standards, Compliance, and Rational Unified Process, Part I: Integrating RUP
and the PMBOK," IBM Developer works (May 10, 2004).

9 Project Management Institute, "Pulse of the Professions: The High Cost of Low
Performance" (2014).

10 Adam Mazmanian, "Google Joins PwC's Vista-Based Bid for Military Health Records," FWC:
The Business of Federal Technology (January 14, 2015).

11 Libby Ellis, "Urban Inspiration," PM Network (January 2006), p. 30.

12 PMI, "2013 PMI Project of the Year Award Winner: Adelaide Desalination Project,"
October 31, 2013, www.youtube.com/watch?v=SIPleb0y0jg.

13 PMI, "Project of the Year Award," www.pmi.org/about/awards/winners/past-award/project-
of-the-year (accessed February 27, 2018).

14 George Santayana, The Life of Reason: Reason in Common Sense (New York: Scribner's,
1905), p. 284.

C h a p t e r 4
Project Integration
Management
L e a r n i n g O b j e c t i v e s
After reading this chapter, you will be able to:

Describe an overall framework for project integration management as it
relates to the other project management knowledge areas and the proj-
ect life cycle

Discuss the strategic planning process and apply different project selec-
tion methods

Explain the importance of creating a project charter to formally initiate projects

Describe project management plan development, understand the content
of these plans, and describe approaches for creating them

Explain project execution, its relationship to project planning, the factors
related to successful results, and tools and techniques to assist in direct-
ing and managing project work

Apply the principles of knowledge management to the various aspects of
project integration

Describe the process of monitoring and controlling a project

Define the integrated change control process, relate this to the steps for
planning for and managing changes on information technology (IT) proj-
ects, and create an appropriate change control system for a project that
incorporates both

Explain the importance of developing and following good procedures for
closing projects

Describe how software can assist in project integration management

Discuss considerations for agile/adaptive environments
Chapter 4
152
What is Project Integration Management?
Project integration management involves coordinating all of the other project manage-
ment knowledge areas throughout a project's life cycle. This integration ensures that all
the elements of a project come together at the right times to complete a project success-
fully. According to the PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition, six main processes are involved in
project integration management:
1. Developing the project charter involves working with stakeholders to create
the document that formally authorizes a project-the charter.
2.
Developing the project management plan involves coordinating all planning
efforts to create a consistent, coherent document-the project management plan.
3. Directing and managing project work involves carrying out the project man-
agement plan by performing the activities included in it.
4. Managing project knowledge involves using existing knowledge and creating
new knowledge to achieve project objectives while also contributing to orga-
nizational learning.
5. Monitoring and controlling project work involves overseeing activities to
meet the performance objectives of the project.
O p e n i n g C a s e
Nick Carson recently became project manager of a critical biotech enterprise at his Silicon
Valley company. This project involved creating the hardware and software for a next
generation (next-gen) DNA-sequencing instrument used in assembling and analyzing the
human genome. Several companies were competing to build smaller, faster sequencing
instruments that would reduce the costs and improve the quality of data analysis in this
rapidly changing field. The biotech project was the company's largest endeavor, and it had
tremendous potential for future growth and revenue.
Unfortunately, there were problems managing this large project. It had been under
way for three years and had already gone through three different project managers. Nick
had been the lead software developer on the project before top management made him
the project manager. The CEO told him to do whatever it took to deliver the first version
of the product in four months and a production version in nine months. Negotiations for
a potential corporate buyout with a larger company influenced top management's sense
of urgency to complete the project.
Highly energetic and intelligent, Nick had the technical background to make the project
a success. He delved into the technical problems and found some critical flaws that kept the
next-gen DNA-sequencing instrument from working. Nevertheless, he was having difficulty in
his new role as project manager. Although Nick and his team got the product out on time, top
management was upset because Nick did not focus on managing all aspects of the project.
He never provided them with accurate schedules or detailed plans of what was happening on
the project. Instead of performing the work of project manager, Nick had taken on the role of
software integrator and troubleshooter. Nick, however, did not understand top management's
complaints-he delivered the product, didn't he? Didn't they realize how valuable he was?
Project Integration Management
153
6. Performing integrated change control involves identifying, evaluating, and
managing changes throughout the project life cycle.
7. Closing the project or phase involves finalizing all activities to formally close
the project or phase.
Figure 4-1 summarizes the inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of project inte-
gration management.
Source: Project Management Institute, Inc. A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowl-
edge, (PMBOK Guide) - Sixth Edition (2017), Figure 4-1, Page 71.
Figure 4-1  Project integration management summary
4.1 Develop
Project Charter
4.5 Monitor and
Control Project Work
4.6 Perform Integrated
Change Control
4.7 Close Project
or Phase
.1 Inputs
.1 Business documents
.2 Agreements
.3 Enterprise environmental
factors
.4 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Data gathering
.3 Interpersonal and team
skills
.4 Meetings
.3 Outputs
.1 Project charter
.2 Assumption log
.1 Inputs
.1 Project charter
.2 Outputs from other
processes
.3 Enterprise environmental
factors
.4 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Data gathering
.3 Interpersonal and team
skills
.4 Meetings
.3 Outputs
.1 Project management plan
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Approved change requests
.4 Enterprise environmental
factors
.5 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Project management
information system
.3 Meetings
.3 Outputs
.1 Deliverables
.2 Work performance data
.3 Issue log
.4 Change requests
.5 Project management plan
updates
.6 Project documents updates
.7 Organizational process
assets updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Deliverables
.4 Enterprise environmental
factors
.5 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Knowledge management
.3 Information management
.4 Interpersonal and team
skills
.3 Outputs
.1 Lessons learned register
.2 Project management plan
updates
.3 Organizational process
assets updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Work performance
information
.4 Agreements
.5 Enterprise environmental
factors
.6 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Data analysis
.3 Decision making
.4 Meetings
.3 Outputs
.1 Work performance reports
.2 Change requests
.3 Project management plan
updates
.4 Project documents updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Work performance reports
.4 Change requests
.5 Enterprise environmental
factors
.6 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Change control tools
.3 Data analysis
.4 Decision making
.5 Meetings
.3 Outputs
.1 Approved change requests
.2 Project management plan
updates
.3 Project documents updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project charter
.2 Project management plan
.3 Project documents
.4 Accepted deliverables
.5 Business documents
.6 Agreements
.7 Procurement
documentation
.8 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Data analysis
.3 Meetings
.3 Outputs
.1 Project documents updates
.2 Final product, service, or
result transition
.3 Final report
.4 Organizational process
assets updates
4.2 Develop Project
Management Plan
4.3 Direct and Manage
Project Work
4.4 Manage
Project Knowledge
Project Integration
Management Overview
Chapter 4
154
Many people consider project integration management the key to overall project
success. Someone must take responsibility for coordinating all of the people, plans,
and work required to complete a project. Someone must focus on the big picture of the
project and steer the project team toward successful completion. Someone must make
the final decisions when conflicts occur among project goals or people. Someone must
communicate key project information to top management. These responsibilities belong
to the project manager, whose chief means for accomplishing all these tasks is project
integration management.
W h a t W e n t W r o n g ?
Everyone knows that making sure people are paid is crucial to employee satisfaction, so
when a payroll system project doesn't work, it is a disaster. Tens of thousands of Cana-
dian federal government workers faced a third year of payroll system torment in 2018.
The Phoenix system project, started in 2009 and budgeted to cost C$309.5, is estimated
to cost over C$1 billion and take three additional years to complete properly. The main
goal of the system was to reduce payroll processing overhead and staffing costs.
"In what is quickly moving into contention as one of the worst government-managed
IT implementations ever, over half the 290,000 plus civil servants paid through the IBM-
developed Phoenix pay system have been underpaid, overpaid, or not paid at all since
its rollout began in February of 2016. . . . According to Canada's Auditor General, nearly
50,000 government workers have had to wait over a year to get their pay straightened out."1
Particularly on large projects, the project manager's main job is project integration
management. To perform well in that role, it is important to understand the organization's
needs and staff your project with skilled workers capable of making the project a success.
Good project integration management is critical to providing stakeholder satisfaction.
Project integration management includes interface management, which involves
identifying and managing the points of interaction between various elements of a project.
The primary tools for interface management are communication and relationships.
The number of interfaces can increase exponentially as the number of people involved
in a project increases. Thus, one of the most important jobs of a project manager is to
establish and maintain good communication and relationships across organizational
interfaces. The project manager must communicate well with all project stakeholders,
including customers, the project team, top management, other project managers, and
opponents of the project.
What happens when a project manager does not communicate well with all
stakeholders? In the chapter's opening case, Nick Carson seemed to ignore a key
stakeholder for the next-gen DNA-sequencing instrument project-his top management.
Nick was comfortable working with other members of the project team, but he was
not familiar with his new job as project manager or the needs of the company's top
management. Nick continued to do his old job of software developer and took on the
Project Integration Management
155
added role of software integrator. He mistakenly thought project integration management
meant software integration management and focused on the project's technical problems.
He totally ignored what project integration management is really about-integrating the
work of all of the people involved in the project by focusing on good communication and
relationship management. Recall that project management is applying knowledge, skills,
tools, and techniques to meet project requirements, while also meeting or exceeding
stakeholder needs and expectations. Nick did not take the time to find out what top
management expected from him as the project manager; he assumed that completing
the project on time and within budget was sufficient to make them happy. Yes, top
management should have made its expectations more clear, but Nick should have taken
the initiative to get the guidance he needed.
In addition to not understanding project integration management, Nick did not use
holistic or systems thinking (see Chapter 2). He burrowed into the technical details of his
particular project. He did not stop to think about what it meant to be the project manager,
how this project related to other projects in the organization, or top management's
expectations of him and his team.
Project integration management must occur within the context of the entire
organization, not just within a particular project. The project manager must integrate the
work of the project with the ongoing operations of the organization. In the opening case,
Nick's company was negotiating a potential buyout with a larger company. Consequently,
top management needed to know when the next-gen DNA-sequencing instrument would
be ready, how big the market was for the product, and if the company had enough
in-house staff to continue to manage projects like this one in the future. Top management
wanted to see a project management plan and a schedule to help monitor the project's
progress and show the potential buyer what was happening. When top managers tried to
talk to Nick about these issues, he soon returned to discussing the technical details of the
project. Even though Nick was very bright, he had no experience or real interest in many
of the company's business aspects. Project managers must always view their projects in
the context of the changing needs of their organizations and respond to requests from top
management. Likewise, top management must keep project managers informed of major
issues that could affect their projects and strive to make processes consistent throughout
their organization.
Following a standard process for managing projects can help prevent some of the
typical problems new and experienced project managers face, including communicating
with and managing stakeholders. Before organizations begin projects, however, they
should go through a formal process to decide what projects to pursue.
Strategic Planning and Project Selection
Successful leaders look at the big picture or strategic plan of the organization to
determine what types of projects will provide the most value. Some may argue that project
managers should not be involved in strategic planning and project selection because top
management is usually responsible for these types of business decisions. But successful
organizations know that project managers can provide valuable insight into the project
selection process.
Chapter 4
156
Strategic Planning
Strategic planning involves determining long-term objectives by analyzing the strengths
and weaknesses of an organization, studying opportunities and threats in the business
environment, predicting future trends, and projecting the need for new products and
services. Strategic planning provides important information to help organizations identify
and then select potential projects.
Many people are familiar with SWOT analysis-analyzing Strengths, Weaknesses,
Opportunities, and Threats-which is one tool used in strategic planning. For example, a
group of four people who want to start a new business in the film industry could perform
a SWOT analysis to help identify potential projects. They might determine the following
based on a SWOT analysis:
Strengths:

As experienced professionals, we have numerous contacts in the film industry.

Two of us have strong sales and interpersonal skills.

Two of us have strong technical skills and are familiar with several
filmmaking software tools.

We all have impressive samples of completed projects.
Weaknesses:

None of us have accounting or financial experience.

We have no clear marketing strategy for products and services.

We have little money to invest in new projects.

We have no company website and limited use of technology to run the business.
Opportunities:

A potential client has mentioned a large project she would like us to bid on.

The film industry continues to grow.

There are two major conferences this year where we could promote our
company.
Threats:

Other individuals or companies can provide the services we can.

Customers might prefer working with more established individuals and
organizations.

There is high risk in the film business.
Based on their SWOT analysis, the four entrepreneurs outline potential projects as
follows:

Find an external accountant or firm to help run the business.

Hire someone to develop a company website, focusing on our experience and
past projects.

Develop a marketing plan.

Develop a strong proposal to get the large project the potential client mentioned.

Plan to promote the company at two major conferences this year.
Project Integration Management
157
Some people like to perform a SWOT analysis by using mind mapping, a technique
that uses branches radiating from a core idea to structure thoughts and ideas. The human
brain does not work in a linear fashion. People come up with many unrelated ideas. By
capturing those ideas in a visual mind map format, you can often generate more ideas
than by creating lists. You can create mind maps by hand, using sticky notes, using
presentation software such as Microsoft PowerPoint, or by using mind mapping software.
Figure 4-2 shows a sample mind map for the new film industry business SWOT
analysis. This diagram was created using MindView Business Edition software by
MatchWare. Notice that this map has four main branches representing strengths,
weaknesses, opportunities, and threats. Ideas in each category are added to the
appropriate branch, and sub-branches are shown for some ideas under those categories.
Notice that several branches end with a project idea, such as Project proposal, Conference
promotions, Accountant, Marketing plan, and Website. You can easily format the project
ideas to make them stand out, as shown in Figure 4-2. From this example, you can see
that no project ideas are identified to address strengths or threats, so these areas should
be discussed further.
Identifying Potential Projects
The first step in project management is deciding what projects to do in the first place.
Therefore, project initiation starts with identifying potential projects, using realistic
methods to select which projects to work on, and then formalizing their initiation by
issuing some sort of project charter.
In addition to using a SWOT analysis, organizations often follow a detailed process for
project selection. Figure 4-3 shows a four-stage process for selecting IT projects. Note the
hierarchical structure of this model and the results produced from each stage.
In the first stage of the selection process, starting at the top of the hierarchy, a
steering committee develops an IT strategic plan that is tied to the organization's overall
strategic plan. In many organizations, this steering committee consists of managers from
departments throughout the company to ensure that all projects are selected in the best
Figure 4-2  Mind map of a SWOT analysis to help identify potential projects
Chapter 4
158
interests of the entire organization. The head of the Project Management Office (PMO)
would be part of this committee because the PMO acts as the central location for keeping
track of all project activities. It is very important to have managers from outside the
IT department assist in developing the IT strategic plan, as they can help IT personnel
understand organizational strategies and identify the business areas that support them. At
the end of this stage, the organization should have a well-defined list of IT strategic goals.
After identifying strategic goals, the next stage in the process for selecting IT projects
is to perform a business area analysis. This analysis outlines business processes that are
central to achieving strategic goals and helps determine which processes could most
benefit from IT. In the next stage, the organization starts defining the scope, benefits, and
constraints of potential IT projects. The last stage in the process for selecting IT projects
is choosing which projects to do and assigning resources for working on them.
Aligning IT with Business Strategy
Notice that aligning IT projects with business strategy is at the heart of selecting IT
projects. This is consistently a top concern for CIOs. It is often difficult to educate line
managers on technology's possibilities and limitations and keep IT professionals in
tune with changing business needs. Most organizations face thousands of problems and
opportunities for improvement. To get the most value from technology, an organization's
strategic plan should guide the IT project selection process. Recall from Chapter 2's Best
Practice feature that IT governance is an important part of ensuring that IT supports
business goals. IT governance helps organizations maximize their investments in IT and
address IT-related risks and opportunities.
An organization must develop a strategy for using IT to define how it will support
the organization's objectives. This IT strategy must align with the organization's strategic
Figure 4-3  Planning process for selecting IT projects
Tie information technology strategy
to mission and vision of organization.
Identify key business areas.
Information
Technology
Strategy Planning
Business Area Analysis
Project Planning
Resource Allocation
Information Technology
Planning Stages
Select information
technology projects.
Assign resources.
Results Produced
Document key business
processes that could beneﬁt
from information technology.
Deﬁne potential projects.
Deﬁne project scope,
beneﬁts, and constraints.
Project Integration Management
159
plans. In fact, research shows that supporting explicit business objectives is the top reason
cited for why organizations invest in IT projects. Other top criteria for investing in IT
projects include supporting implicit business objectives and providing financial incentives,
such as a good internal rate of return (IRR) or net present value (NPV).2 Using a balanced
scorecard approach, as described later in this chapter also helps align projects with
business strategy. Gartner estimated worldwide IT spending at $3.6 trillion in 2018, an
increase of 3.5 percent from 2017. The majority of survey respondents felt that the CIO
role was becoming more strategic, reporting that 62 percent sit on the executive board, an
all-time high from past surveys.3
Information systems often are central to business strategy. Author Michael Porter,
who developed the concepts of the strategic value of competitive advantage and value
chain, and many other experts have emphasized the importance of using IT to support
strategic plans and provide a competitive advantage. Many information systems are
classified as strategic because they directly support key business strategies. For example,
information systems can support an organizational strategy of being a low-cost producer.
As one of the largest retailers in the United States, Walmart's inventory control system is
a classic example of such a strategic system. Information systems can support a strategy
of providing specialized products or services that set a company apart from others in the
industry. Consider the classic example of Federal Express's introduction of online package
tracking systems. FedEx was the first company to provide this type of service, which gave
it a competitive advantage until others developed similar systems. Information systems
can also support a strategy of selling to a particular market or occupying a specific product
niche. Owens Corning developed a strategic information system that boosted the sales of
its home-insulation products by providing its customers with a system for evaluating the
energy efficiency of building designs. The editor in chief of CIO magazine stated, "The
smart use of technology is always a key component in driving innovation and creating a
competitive edge. We see IT value proving itself across the board in many organizations."4
B e s t P r a c t i c e
In 2017 Fortune released their Business by Design list, highlighting the 24 companies
they believe are using technology and globalization to find their competitive advantage.
A few excerpts from their analysis include the following:

"No company tops Apple (aapl, 20.24%) for demonstrating the strategic power
of great design and learning to 'think different.' While there is a raging debate
about whether or not Apple has lost some of its design mojo in recent years, as
the story 'Has Apple Lost Its Design Mojo' explores, the world's most valuable
company continues to push boundaries. Meanwhile, a host of other leading
companies, including Alphabet, Amazon, and Nike, have achieved success by
expanding design capabilities.
(continued)
Chapter 4
160
Methods for Selecting Projects
Organizations identify many potential projects as part of their strategic planning
processes, and they need to narrow down the list of potential projects to the ones that will
be of most benefit. They often rely on experienced project managers to help them make
project selection decisions. Selecting projects is not an exact science, and many methods
exist for selecting projects. Five common techniques are as follows:

Focusing on broad organizational needs

Categorizing IT projects

Performing net present value or other financial analyses

Using a weighted scoring model

Implementing a balanced scorecard
In practice, many organizations use a combination of these approaches to select
projects. Each approach has advantages and disadvantages, and it is up to management
to determine the best approach for selecting projects based on their particular
organization.
Focusing on Broad Organizational Needs
Top managers must focus on meeting their organizations' many needs when deciding
what projects to undertake, when to undertake them, and to what level. Projects that
address broad organizational needs are much more likely to be successful because they
will be important to the organization. For example, a broad organizational need might be

Dyson is the U.K.'s biggest investor in robotics and artificial intelligence
research. In September, the company launched the Dyson Institute of Engi-
neering and Technology, a university within its office grounds, to feed its grow-
ing headcount of engineers and scientists, which Dyson predicts will double to
6,000 by 2020.

It wasn't so long ago that Samsung found itself in a courtroom defending its
creativity against Apple. But the company's decades-long bid to move beyond
its reputation as a budget brand has paid off. Today Samsung is tech's larg-
est spender on R&D. And its TVs, phones, appliances, services, and offices?
Covetable.

Capital One has adopted design thinking as a mantra to reinvent itself as a
software company and innovation incubator, rather than a traditional bank.
After acquiring design firms Adaptive Path and Monsoon, Capital One has
recently rolled out fresh digital features, from an emoji-enabled SMS chatbot
to GPS-tracked transaction histories. In early 2018 it will unveil its 1717
Innovation Center in Richmond, a 42,000-square-foot facility housing an
experience design research lab and, through a partnership with an incubator
program, some 50 startups."5
Project Integration Management
161
to improve safety, increase morale, provide better communications, or improve customer
service. However, it is often difficult to provide a strong justification for many IT projects
related to these broad organizational needs. For example, estimating the financial value
of such projects is often impossible, even though everyone agrees that they have a high
value. As the old proverb says, "It is better to measure gold roughly than to count pennies
precisely."
One method for selecting projects based on broad organizational needs is to
determine whether they first meet three important criteria: need, funding, and will. Do
people in the organization agree that the project needs to be done? Does the organization
have the desire and capacity to provide adequate funds to perform the project? Is there a
strong will to make the project succeed? For example, many visionary CEOs can describe
a broad need to improve certain aspects of their organizations, such as communications.
Although they cannot specifically describe how to improve communications, they might
allocate funds to projects that address this need. As projects progress, the organization
must reevaluate the need, funding, and will for each project to determine if it should be
continued, redefined, or terminated.
Categorizing IT Projects
Another method for selecting projects is based on various categorizations, such as the
project's impetus, time window, and general priority. The impetus for a project is often to
respond to a problem, an opportunity, or a directive.

Problems are undesirable situations that prevent an organization from
achieving its goals. These problems can be current or anticipated. For
example, users of an information system may be having trouble logging
on to the system or getting information in a timely manner because the
system has reached its capacity. In response, the company could initiate
a project to enhance the current system by adding more access lines or
upgrading the hardware with a faster processor, more memory, or more
storage space.

Opportunities are chances to improve the organization. For example, the
project described in the chapter's opening case involves creating a new
product that can make or break the entire company.

Directives are new requirements imposed by management, government, or
some external influence. For example, many projects that involve medical
technologies must meet rigorous government requirements.
Organizations select projects for any of these reasons. It is often easier to get
approval and funding for projects that address problems or directives because the
organization must respond to these categories to avoid hurting their business. Many
problems and directives must be resolved quickly, but managers must also apply
systems thinking and seek opportunities for improving the organization through IT
projects.
Another categorization for IT projects is based on timing: How long will it take
to complete a project and what is the deadline for completing it? For example, some
Chapter 4
162
potential projects must be finished within a specific time window; otherwise, they are
no longer valid projects. Some projects can be completed very quickly-within a few
weeks, days, or even minutes. Many organizations have an end-user support function to
handle very small projects that can be completed quickly. However, even though many IT
projects can be completed quickly, it is still important to prioritize them.
Organizations can also categorize IT projects as having high, medium, or low priority
based on the current business environment. For example, if it is crucial to cut operating
costs quickly, projects that have the most potential to do so would be given a high priority.
An organization should always complete high-priority projects first, even if a low- or
medium-priority project could be finished in less time. Usually an organization has many
more potential IT projects than it can undertake at one time, so it is crucial to work on
the most important projects first.
Performing Financial Analyses
Financial considerations are an important aspect of the project selection process, whether
economic times are tough or the economy is growing. As authors Dennis Cohen and
Robert Graham put it, "Projects are never ends in themselves. Financially they are always
a means to an end, cash."6 Many organizations require an approved business case before
pursuing projects, and financial projections are a critical component of the business case.
(See Chapter 3 for a sample business case.) Three primary methods for projecting the
financial value of projects include net present value analysis, return on investment, and
payback analysis. Because project managers often deal with business executives, they
must understand how to speak business language, which often boils down to the following
important financial concepts.
Net Present Value Analysis
Most people know that a dollar earned today is worth more than a dollar earned five
years from now-a principle called the time value of money. Many projects have financial
implications that extend into the future. In order to evaluate potential projects equally,
you need to consider their net present value.
Net present value (NPV) analysis is a method of calculating the expected net
monetary gain or loss from a project by calculating the value of all expected future cash
inflows and outflows at the present time. An organization should consider only projects
with a positive NPV if financial value is a key criterion for project selection. A positive
NPV means that the return from a project exceeds the cost of capital-the return
available from investing the capital elsewhere. In other words, the cost of capital is the
rate of return that could have been earned by putting the same money into a different
investment with equal risk. Projects with higher NPVs are preferred to projects with lower
NPVs, if all other factors are equal.
To calculate NPV, you must assume a certain discount rate. The discount rate is the
interest rate used to discount cash flows. It takes into account not just the time value of
money but also the risk or uncertainty of future cash flows. The greater the uncertainty of
future cash flows, the higher the discount rate. It is also called the capitalization rate or
the opportunity cost of capital.
Project Integration Management
163
Figure 4-4 illustrates this concept in Microsoft Excel for two different projects. Note
that this example starts discounting immediately in Year 1 and uses a 10 percent discount
rate. You can use the NPV function in Excel to calculate the NPV quickly. Detailed steps
for performing this calculation manually are presented later.
Figure 4-4 lists the projected benefits first, followed by the costs, and then the
calculated cash flow amount. Note that the sum of the cash flow-benefits minus costs or
income minus expenses-is the same for both projects at $5,000. The net present values
are different, however, because they account for the time value of money. Project 1 has
a negative cash flow of $5,000 in the first year, while Project 2 has a negative cash flow
of only $1,000 in the first year. Although both projects have the same total cash flows
without discounting, they are not of comparable financial value. Project 2's NPV of $3,201
is better than Project 1's NPV of $2,316. NPV analysis, therefore, is a method for making
equal comparisons between cash flows for multiyear projects.
To determine NPV, follow these steps:
1. Determine the estimated costs and benefits for the life of the project and the
products it creates. For example, JWD Consulting assumed that its project
would produce a system in about six months that would be used for three
years, so costs are included in Year 0, when the system is developed. Ongoing
system costs and projected benefits are included for Years 1, 2, and 3.
2. Determine the discount rate. In Figure 4-4, the discount rate is 10 percent
per year.
3. Calculate the net present value. Most spreadsheet software has a built-in
function to calculate NPV. For example, Figure 4-4 shows the formula that
Figure 4-4  Net present value example
A
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
B
C
D
E
F
17
G
Discount rate
10%
PROJECT 1
PROJECT 2
YEAR 1
YEAR 1
YEAR 2
YEAR 3 YEAR 4 YEAR 5
YEAR 2
YEAR 3 YEAR 4 YEAR 5
TOTAL
TOTAL
Beneﬁts
Costs
Cash ﬂow
NPV
$0
$2,000
$3,000
$4,000
$5,000
$5,000
$1,000
$1,000
$1,000
$1,000
$1,000
$2,000
$3,000
$4,000
($5,000)
$14,000
$9,000
$5,000
$2,316
Formula =npv(b1,b6:f6)
Formula =npv(b1,b13:f13)
Beneﬁts
Costs
Cash ﬂow
NPV
$1,000
$2,000
($1,000)
$2,000
$2,000
$0
$4,000
$2,000
$2,000
$4,000
$2,000
$2,000
$4,000
$2,000
$2,000
$15,000
$10,000
$5,000
$3,201
Note that totals are
equal, but NPVs are
not because of the
time value of money
Chapter 4
164
Microsoft Excel uses: 5npv(discount rate, range of cash flows), where the
discount rate is in cell B1 and the range of cash flows for Project 1 are in
cells B6 through F6. (See Chapter 7, Project Cost Management, for more
information on cash flow and other cost-related terms.) To use the NPV
function, you must have a row or column in the spreadsheet for the cash flow
each year, which is the benefit amount for that year minus the cost amount.
The result of the formula yields an NPV of $2,316 for Project 1 and $3,201 for Project
2. Because both projects have positive NPVs, they are good candidates for selection.
However, because Project 2 has an NPV that is 38 percent higher than Project 1, it would
be the better choice. If the two numbers are close, then other methods should be used to
help decide which project to select.
The mathematical formula for calculating NPV is
∑
5
1
5
r t
NPV
A /(1
)
t
0 . . . n
t
where t equals the year of the cash flow, n is the last year of the cash flow, A is the
amount of cash flow each year, and r is the discount rate.
If you cannot enter the data into spreadsheet software, you can perform the
calculations by hand or with a calculator. First, determine the annual discount factor-a
multiplier for each year based on the discount rate and year-and then apply it to the
costs and benefits for each year. The formula for the discount factor is
1 r
1/(1
)t, where r
is the discount rate, such as 8 percent, and t is the year. For example, the discount factors
used in Figure 4-5 are calculated as follows:
Figure 4-5  JWD Consulting net present value and return on investment example
Discount rate
8%
Assume the project is completed in Year 0
Year
Costs
Discount factor
Discounted costs
Beneﬁts
Discount factor
Discounted beneﬁts
Discounted beneﬁts - costs
Cumulative beneﬁts - costs
ROI
0
1
2
3
Total
140,000
1
0.93
0.86
0.79
140,000
37,200
40,000
40,000
40,000
243,200
34,400
31,600
0 200,000 200,000 200,000
1
0.93
0.86
0.79
0 186,000
516,000
172,000 158,000
(140,000) 148,800 137,600 126,400
8,800 146,400 272,800
112%
Payback in Year 1
(140,000)
272,800
NPV
Project Integration Management
165
5
1
5
5
1
5
5
1
5
5
1
5
Year 0 : discount factor
1/(1
0.08)
1
Year 1 : discount factor
1/(1
0.08)
0.93
Year 2 : discount factor
1/(1
0.08)
0. 86
Year 3 : discount factor
1/(1
0.08)
0. 79
0
1
2
3
After determining the discount factor for each year, multiply the costs and benefits
each year by the appropriate discount factor. (Note that the discount factor in this case is
rounded to two decimal places.) For example, in Figure 4-5, the discounted cost for Year 1
is
3
5
$40,000
0.93
$37,200. Next, sum all of the discounted costs and benefits each year
to get a total. The total discounted costs in Figure 4-5 are $243,200. To calculate the NPV,
subtract the total discounted costs from the total discounted benefits. In this example, the
NPV is
2
5
$516,000
$243,200
$272,800.
When calculating NPV, some organizations refer to the investment year or years for
project costs as Year 0 and do not discount costs in Year 0. Other organizations start
discounting immediately based on their financial procedures; it's simply a matter of
preference for the organization.
The discount rate can also vary, often based on the prime rate and other economic
considerations. Some people consider it to be the rate at which the organization could
borrow money for the project. Financial experts in your organization can tell you what
discount rate to use.
When calculating NPV, you can enter costs as negative numbers instead of positive
numbers, and you can list costs first and then benefits. For example, Figure 4-5 shows
the financial calculations used in the JWD Consulting business case for the project
management intranet site project described in Chapter 3. Note that the discount rate is
8 percent, costs are not discounted in Year 0, the discount factors are rounded to two
decimal places, costs are listed first, and costs are entered as positive numbers. Also
note that costs and benefits are discounted before they are summed. The NPV and other
calculations are the same; only the format is different. A project manager needs to check
with the organization to learn its guidelines for when discounting starts, what discount
rate to use, and what format the organization prefers.
Return on Investment
Another important financial consideration is return on investment. Return on investment
(ROI) is the result of subtracting the project costs from the benefits and then dividing by the
costs. For example, if you invest $100 today and next year it is worth $110, your ROI is ($110
- 100)/100 or 0.10 (10 percent). Note that the ROI is always a percentage. It can be positive
or negative. For multiyear projects, it is best to use discounted costs and benefits when
calculating ROI. Figure 4-5 shows an ROI of 112 percent, which you calculate as follows:
5
2
5
2
5
ROI
(total discounted benefits
total discounted costs)/discounted costs
ROI
(516,000
243,200)/243,200
112%
The higher the ROI is, the better. An ROI of 112 percent is outstanding.
Many organizations have a required rate of return for projects. The required rate
of return is the minimum acceptable rate of return on an investment. For example, an
Chapter 4
166
organization might have a required rate of return of at least 10 percent for projects. The
organization bases the required rate of return on what it could expect to receive elsewhere
for an investment of comparable risk. You can also determine a project's internal rate of
return (IRR) by finding what discount rate results in an NPV of zero for the project. You
can use the Goal Seek function in Excel to set the cell that contains the formula for NPV
to the value 0 by changing the cell that contains the discount rate. The resulting discount
rate is the IRR. For example, in Figure 4-4, you could set cell b7 to zero while changing
cell b1 to find that the IRR for Project 1 is 27 percent.
Payback Analysis
Payback analysis is another important financial tool when selecting projects. Payback
period is the amount of time it will take to recoup the total dollars invested in a project,
in terms of net cash inflows. In other words, payback analysis determines how much
time will elapse before accrued benefits overtake accrued and continuing costs. Payback
occurs when the net cumulative benefits equal the net cumulative costs or when the net
cumulative benefits minus costs equal zero. Figure 4-5 shows how to find the payback
period. The cumulative benefits minus costs for Year 0 is $140,000. Adding that number
to the discounted benefits minus costs for Year 1 results in $8,800. Because that number
is positive, the payback occurs in Year 1.
Creating a chart helps illustrate more precisely when the payback period occurs.
Figure 4-6 charts the cumulative discounted costs and cumulative discounted benefits
each year using the numbers from Figure 4-5. Note that the lines cross around Year 1. This
is the point where the cumulative discounted benefits equal the cumulative discounted
Figure 4-6  Charting the payback period for the JWD Consulting project
600,000
Year
400,000
300,000
200,000
100,000
0
0
1
2
3
500,000
Payback
$
Cumulative costs
Cumulative beneﬁts
Payback
Project Integration Management
167
costs, so that the cumulative discounted benefits minus costs is zero. Beyond this point,
discounted benefits exceed discounted costs and the project shows a profit. An early
payback period, such as in the first or second year, is considered very good.
Many organizations have requirements for the length of the payback period of
an investment. They might require all IT projects to have a payback period of less
than two years or even one year, regardless of the estimated NPV or ROI. Dan Hoover,
vice president and area director of Ciber Inc., an international systems integration
consultancy, suggests that organizations, especially small firms, should focus on payback
period when making IT investment decisions. "If your costs are recovered in the first
year," Hoover said, "the project is worthy of serious consideration, especially if the
benefits are high. If the payback period is more than a year, it may be best to look
elsewhere."7 However, organizations must also consider long-range goals when making
technology investments. Many crucial projects cannot achieve a payback so quickly or be
completed in such a short time period.
To aid in project selection, project managers must understand the organization's
financial expectations for projects. Top management must also understand the limitations
of financial estimates, particularly for IT projects. For example, it is very difficult to
develop good estimates of projected costs and benefits for IT projects. You will learn more
about estimating costs and benefits in Chapter 7, Project Cost Management.
Using a Weighted Scoring Model
A weighted scoring model is a tool that provides a systematic process for selecting
projects based on many criteria. These criteria can include factors such as meeting broad
organizational needs; addressing problems, opportunities, or directives; the amount of
time needed to complete the project; the overall priority of the project; and projected
financial performance of the project.
The first step in creating a weighted scoring model is to identify criteria that are
important to the project selection process. It often takes time to develop and reach
agreement on these criteria. Holding facilitated brainstorming sessions or using groupware
to exchange ideas can aid in developing these criteria. Possible criteria for IT projects
include the following:

Supports key business objectives or strategies

Has strong internal sponsor

Has strong customer support

Uses realistic level of technology

Can be implemented in one year or less

Provides positive NPV

Has low risk in meeting scope, time, and cost goals
Next, you assign a weight to each criterion based on its importance. Once again,
determining weights requires consultation and final agreement. You can assign weights
based on percentages; the weights of the criteria must total 100 percent. You then assign
numerical scores to each criterion (e.g., 0 to 100) for each project. The scores indicate
how much each project meets each criterion. At this point, you can use a spreadsheet
application to create a matrix of projects, criteria, weights, and scores. Figure 4-7 provides
Chapter 4
168
an example of a weighted scoring model to evaluate four different projects. After assigning
weights for the criteria and scores for each project, you calculate a weighted score for
each project by multiplying the weight for each criterion by its score and adding the
resulting values.
For example, you calculate the weighted score for Project 1 in Figure 4-7 as

1
1
1
1
1
1
5
25% * 90
15% * 70
15% * 50
10% * 25
5 * 20
20% * 50
10% * 20
56
Note that in this example, Project 2 would be the obvious choice for selection because
it has the highest weighted score. Creating a bar chart to graph the weighted scores for
each project allows you to see the results at a glance.
If you create the weighted scoring model in a spreadsheet, you can enter the data,
create and copy formulas, and perform a "what-if" analysis. For example, suppose that
Figure 4-7  Sample weighted scoring model for project selection
A
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
B
C
D
E
F
Weighted Project Scores
Weight
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
Criteria
Project 1 Project 2
Project 3
Project 4
Supports key business objectives
Has strong internal sponsor
Has strong customer support
Uses realistic level of technology
Can be implemented in one year or less
Provides positive NPV
Has low risk in meeting scope, time, and cost goals
25%
90
90
50
20
15%
70
90
50
20
15%
50
90
50
20
10%
25
90
50
70
5%
20
20
50
90
20%
50
70
50
50
10%
20
50
50
90
100%
56
78.5
50
41.5
Weighted Score by Project
0
Project 4
Project 3
Project 2
Project 1
20
40
60
100
80
Project Integration Management
169
you want to change the weights for the criteria. By having the weighted scoring model
in a spreadsheet, you can easily change the weights and update the weighted scores and
charts automatically. This capability allows you to investigate various options for different
stakeholders quickly. Ideally, the result should reflect the group's consensus, and any
major disagreements should be documented.
You can also establish how well projects meet criteria by assigning points. For
example, a project might receive 10 points if it definitely supports key business objectives,
5 points if it somewhat supports them, and 0 points if it is totally unrelated to key business
objectives. With a point model, you can simply add all the points to determine the best
projects for selection, without having to multiply weights and scores and sum the results.
You can also determine minimum scores or thresholds for specific criteria in a weighted
scoring model. For example, suppose that an organization should not consider a project if it
does not score at least 50 out of 100 on every criterion. You can build this type of threshold
into the weighted scoring model to reject projects that do not meet these minimum
standards. As you can see, weighted scoring models can aid in project selection decisions.
Implementing a Balanced Scorecard
Drs. Robert Kaplan and David Norton developed another approach to help select and manage
projects that align with business strategy. A balanced scorecard is a strategic planning and
management system that helps organizations align business activities to strategy, improve
communications, and monitor performance against strategic goals. The Gartner Group
estimates that over half of large U.S. organizations use this approach. The balanced scorecard
has evolved over time. "The 'new' balanced scorecard transforms an organization's strategic
plan from an attractive but passive document into the 'marching orders' for the organization
on a daily basis. It provides a framework that not only provides performance measurements
but helps planners identify what should be done and measured."8 You can find several
examples of balanced scorecards from manufacturing companies like Shat-R-Shield to
non profits like the Kenya Red Cross at www.balancedscorecard.org.
As you can see, organizations can use many approaches to select projects. Many
project managers have some say in which projects their organizations select for
implementation. Even if they do not, they need to understand the motives and overall
business strategies for the projects they are managing. Project managers and team members
are often called upon to explain the importance of their projects, and understanding project
selection methods can help them represent the project effectively.
Developing a Project Charter
After top management decides which projects to pursue, it is important to let the
rest of the organization know about these projects. Management needs to create and
distribute documentation to authorize project initiation. This documentation can take
many different forms, but one common form is a project charter. A project charter is
a document that formally recognizes the existence of a project and provides direction
on the project's objectives and management. It authorizes the project manager to use
organizational resources to complete the project. Ideally, the project manager plays a
major role in developing the project charter.
Chapter 4
170
Instead of project charters, some organizations initiate projects using a simple letter
of agreement, while others use much longer documents or formal contracts. Key project
stakeholders should sign a project charter to acknowledge agreement on the need for
and intent of the project. A project charter is a key output of the initiation process, as
described in Chapter 3.
The PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition lists inputs, tools, techniques, and outputs of
the six project integration management processes. The following inputs are helpful in
developing a project charter:

A business case: As explained in Chapter 3, many projects require a business
case to justify their investment. Information in the business case, such as
the project objective, high-level requirements, and time and cost goals, is
included in the project charter.

Benefits management plan: This document describes how and when the
projected benefits of the project will be delivered and how they will be
managed. Topics covered can include the target benefits, strategic alignment,
timeframe for realizing benefits, benefits owner, metrics, assumptions,
and risks.

Agreements: If you are working on a project under contract for an external
customer, the contract or agreement should include much of the information
needed for creating a good project charter. Some people might use a contract
or agreement in place of a charter. However, many contracts are difficult
to read and can often change, so it is still a good idea to create a project
charter.

Enterprise environmental factors: These factors include relevant
government or industry standards, the organization's infrastructure,
and marketplace conditions. Managers should review these factors when
developing a project charter.

Organizational process assets: Organizational process assets include formal
and informal plans, policies, procedures, guidelines, information systems,
financial systems, management systems, lessons learned, and historical
information that can influence a project's success.
The main tools and techniques for developing a project charter are expert judgment,
data gathering, interpersonal and team skills, and meetings. Experts from inside and
outside the organization should be consulted when creating a project charter to make sure
it is useful and realistic. Facilitators often make it easier for experts to collaborate and
provide useful information.
The two outputs of the process to develop a project charter are the charter itself and
an assumption log. Although the format of project charters can vary tremendously, they
should include at least the following basic information:

The project's title and date of authorization

The project manager's name and contact information
Project Integration Management
171

A summary schedule, including the planned start and finish dates; if a
summary milestone schedule is available, it should also be included or
referenced

A summary of the project's budget or reference to budgetary documents

A brief description of the project objectives, including the business need or
other justification for authorizing the project

Project success criteria, including project approval requirements and who
signs off on the project

A summary of the planned approach for managing the project, which should
describe stakeholder needs and expectations, important assumptions,
and constraints, and should refer to related documents, such as a
communications management plan, as available

A roles and responsibilities matrix

A sign-off section for signatures of key project stakeholders

A comments section in which stakeholders can provide important comments
related to the project
Unfortunately, many internal projects, like the one described in the opening case
of this chapter, do not have project charters. They often have a budget and general
guidelines, but no formal, signed documentation. If Nick had a project charter to refer
to-especially if it included information for managing the project-top management
would have received the business information it needed, and managing the project might
have been easier. Project charters are usually not difficult to write. The difficult part is
getting people with the proper knowledge and authority to write and sign the project
charter. Top management should have reviewed the charter with Nick because he was
the project manager. In their initial meeting, they should have discussed roles and
responsibilities, as well as their expectations of how Nick should work with them. If there
is no project charter, the project manager should work with key stakeholders, including
top management, to create one. Table 4-1 shows a possible charter that Nick could have
created for completing the next-gen DNA-sequencing instrument project.
Many projects fail because of unclear requirements and expectations, so starting with
a project charter makes a lot of sense. If project managers are having difficulty obtaining
support from project stakeholders, for example, they can refer to the agreements listed
in the project charter. Note that the sample project charter in Table 4-1 includes several
items under the Approach section to help Nick in managing the project and the sponsor
in overseeing it. To help Nick make the transition to project manager, the charter said
that the company would hire a technical replacement and part-time assistant for Nick
as soon as possible. To help Ahmed, the project sponsor, feel more comfortable with
how the project was being managed, items were included to ensure proper planning and
communications. Recall from Chapter 2 that executive support contributes the most to
successful IT projects. Because Nick was the fourth project manager on this project, top
management at his company obviously had problems choosing and working with
project managers.
Chapter 4
172
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Name
Role
Position
Contact Information
Ahmed Abrams
Sponsor
CEO
aabrams@dnaconsulting.com
Nick Carson
Project Manager
Manager
ncarson@dnaconsulting.com
Susan Johnson
Team Member
DNA Expert
sjohnson@dnaconsulting.com
Renyong Chi
Team Member
Testing Expert
rchi@dnaconsulting.com
Erik Haus
Team Member
Programmer
ehaus@dnaconsulting.com
Bill Strom
Team Member
Programmer
bstrom@dnaconsulting.com
Maggie Elliot
Team Member
Programmer
melliot@dnaconsulting.com
Project Title: Next-gen DNA-Sequencing Instrument Completion Project
Date of Authorization: February 1
Project Start Date: February 1    Projected Finish Date: November 1
Key Schedule Milestones:

Complete first version of the software by June 1

Complete production version of the software by November 1
Budget Information: The firm has allocated $1.5 million for this project, and more
funds are available if needed. The majority of costs for this project will be internal
labor. All hardware will be outsourced.
Project Manager: Nick Carson, (650) 949-0707, ncarson@dnaconsulting.com
Project Objectives: The Next-gen DNA-sequencing instrument project has been under
way for three years. It is a crucial project for our company. This is the first charter for
the project; the objective is to complete the first version of the instrument software in
four months and a production version in nine months.
Main Project Success Criteria: The software must meet all written specifications, be
thoroughly tested, and be completed on time. The CEO will formally approve the proj-
ect with advice from other key stakeholders.
Approach:

Hire a technical replacement for Nick Carson and a part-time assistant as soon
as possible.

Within one month, develop a clear work breakdown structure, scope state-
ment, and Gantt chart detailing the work required to complete the Next-gen
DNA-sequencing instrument.

Purchase all required hardware upgrades within two months.

Hold weekly progress review meetings with the core project team and the sponsor.

Conduct thorough software testing per the approved test plans.
Table 4-1  Project charter for the next-gen DNA-sequencing instrument completion project
(continued)
Project Integration Management
173
Table 4-1  Project charter for the next-gen DNA-sequencing instrument completion project
(continued)
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Name
Role
Position
Contact Information
Sign-off: (signatures of all the above stakeholders)
Ahmed Abrams
Nick Carson
Susan Johnson
Renyong Chi
Erik Haus
Bill Strom
Maggie Elliot
Comments: (handwritten or typed comments from above stakeholders, if applicable)
"I want to be heavily involved in this project. It is crucial to our company's
success, and I expect everyone to help make it succeed."-ahmed abrams
"The software test plans are complete and well documented. If
anyone has questions, do not hesitate to contact me."-Renyong Chi
Taking the time to discuss, develop, and sign off on a simple project charter could
have prevented several problems in this case.
In addition to a project charter, it is a good idea to create an assumption log.
Assumptions are usually identified in the business case, but additional assumptions
should be documented throughout the project. Assumptions can be related to technology,
estimates, schedules, risks, etc. A simple document or spreadsheet can be used to
log assumptions. Information could include an assumption ID, date, source, category,
description, and status.
After creating a project charter and assumption log, the next step in project
integration management is preparing a project management plan.
Developing a Project Management Plan
To coordinate and integrate information across project management knowledge areas
and across the organization, there must be a good project management plan. A project
management plan is a document used to coordinate all project planning documents
and help guide a project's execution and control. Plans created in the other knowledge
areas are considered subsidiary parts of the overall project management plan. Project
management plans also document project planning assumptions and decisions
regarding choices, facilitate communication among stakeholders, define the content,
extent, and timing of key management reviews, and provide a baseline for progress
measurement and project control. Project management plans should be dynamic,
flexible, and subject to change when the environment or project changes. These plans
Chapter 4
174
should greatly assist the project manager in leading the project team and assessing
project status.
To create and assemble a good project management plan, the project manager must
practice the art of project integration management, because information is required from
all of the project management knowledge areas. Working with the project team and other
stakeholders to create a project management plan will help the project manager guide the
project's execution and understand the overall project.
The main inputs for developing a project management plan include the project
charter, outputs from other processes, enterprise environment factors, and organizational
process assets. The main tool and technique is expert judgments are expert judgment,
data gathering, interpersonal and team skills, and meetings, and the output is a project
management plan.
Project Management Plan Contents*
The project management plan briefly describes the overall scope, schedule, and cost
baselines for the project. Specific plans in each of those knowledge areas provide
more detailed baseline information. For example, the project management plan might
provide a high-level budget baseline for the entire project, whereas the cost baseline
prepared as part of the project cost management knowledge area provides detailed
cost projections by WBS by month. The project management plan can also include a
project life cycle description and development approach, as shown in Table 4-2. Also
Project Management Plan
Project Documents
1. Scope management plan
2. Requirements
management plan
3. Schedule management
plan
4. Cost management plan
5. Quality management
plan
6. Resource management
plan
7. Communications
management plan
8. Risk management plan
9. Procurement
management plan
1. Activity attributes
2. Activity list
3. Assumption log
4. Basis of estimates
5. Change log
6. Cost estimates
7. Cost forecasts
8. Duration estimates
9. Issue log
10. Lessons learned
register
11. Milestone list
12. Physical resource
assignments
13. Project calendars
14. Project
communications
15. Project schedule
16. Project schedule
network diagram
17. Project scope
statement
18. Project team
assignments
19. Quality control
measurements
20. Quality metrics
21. Quality report
22. Requirements
documentation
Table 4-2  Project management plan and project documents
(continued)
Project Integration Management
175
notice the many other project documents that project teams can create, as needed, for
their projects.
Project management plans should be dynamic, flexible, and receptive to change when
the environment or project changes. These plans should greatly assist the project manager
in leading the project team and assessing project status. Just as projects are unique, so are
project plans. For a small project involving a few people over a couple of months, a project
charter, scope statement, and Gantt chart might be the only formal project planning
documents needed; there would not be a need for a separate project management plan.
A large project involving 100 people over three years would benefit from having a detailed
project management plan and separate plans for each knowledge area. Because all project
plans should help guide the completion of the particular project, they should be tailored as
needed for each project.
There are, however, common elements to most project management plans, as
follows:

Introduction/overview of the project

Project organization

Management and technical processes (including project lifecycle description
and development approach, as applicable)

Work to be performed (scope)

Schedule and budget information

References to other project planning documents
Project Management Plan
Project Documents
10. Stakeholder engagement
plan
11. Change management
plan
12. Configuration
management plan
13. Scope baseline
14. Schedule baseline
15. Cost baseline
16. Performance
measurement baseline
17. Project life cycle
description
18. Development approach
23. Requirements
traceability matrix
24. Resource breakdown
structure
25. Resource calendars
26. Resource
requirements
27. Risk register
28. Risk report
29. Schedule data
30. Schedule forecasts
31. Stakeholder register
32. Team charter
33. Test and evaluation
documents
Source: Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of
Knowledge (PMBOK Guide) - Sixth Edition (2017).
Table 4-2  Project management plan and project documents (continued)
Chapter 4
176
Using Guidelines to Create Project Management Plans
Many organizations use guidelines to create project management plans. Microsoft
Project 2016 and other project management software packages come with several
template files to use as guidelines. However, do not confuse a project management plan
with a Gantt chart. The project management plan is much more than a Gantt chart, as
described earlier.
Many government agencies also provide guidelines for creating project management
plans. For example, the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) Standard 2167, Software
Development Plan, describes the format for contractors to use when creating a software
development plan for DOD projects. The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
(IEEE) Standard 1058-1998 describes the contents of its Software Project Management
Plan (SPMP). Table 4-3 provides some of the categories for the IEEE SPMP. Companies
that work on software development projects for the Department of Defense must follow
this standard or a similar standard.
In many private organizations, specific documentation standards are not as rigorous;
however, there are usually guidelines for developing project management plans. It is
good practice to follow the organization's standards or guidelines for developing project
management plans to facilitate their execution. The organization can work more
efficiently if all project management plans follow a similar format. Recall from Chapter 1
Major Section
Headings
Section Topics
Overview
Purpose, scope, and objectives; assumptions and constraints;
project deliverables; schedule and budget summary; evolution of
the plan
Project
Organization
External interfaces; internal structure; roles and responsibilities
Managerial Process
Plan
Start-up plans (estimation, staffing, resource acquisition, and
project staff training plans); work plan (work activities, sched-
ule, resource, and budget allocation); control plan; risk manage-
ment plan; closeout plan
Technical Process
Plans
Process model; methods, tools, and techniques; infrastructure
plan; product acceptance plan
Supporting Process
Plans
Configuration management plan; verification and validation
plan; documentation plan; quality assurance plan; reviews and
audits; problem resolution plan; subcontractor management
plan; process improvement plan
Source: IEEE Standard 1058-1998.
Table 4-3  Sample contents for the IEEE software project management plan (SPMP)
Project Integration Management
177
that companies that excel in project management develop and deploy standardized project
delivery systems.
The winners clearly spell out what needs to be done in a project, by whom, when,
and how. For this they use an integrated toolbox, including PM tools, methods,
and techniques. . . . If a scheduling template is developed and used over and over, it
becomes a repeatable action that leads to higher productivity and lower uncertainty.
Sure, using scheduling templates is neither a breakthrough nor a feat. But laggards
exhibited almost no use of the templates. Rather, in constructing schedules their
project managers started with a clean sheet, a clear waste of time.9
In the chapter's opening case, Nick Carson's top managers were disappointed
because he did not provide the project planning information they needed to make
important business decisions. They wanted to see detailed project management plans,
including schedules and a means for tracking progress. Nick had never created a project
management plan or even a simple progress report before, and the organization did not
provide templates or examples to follow. If it had, Nick might have been able to deliver the
information top management was expecting.
Directing and Managing Project Work
Directing and managing project work involves managing and performing the work
described in the project management plan, one of the main inputs for this process.
Other inputs include approved change requests, enterprise environmental factors, and
organizational process assets. The majority of time on a project is usually spent on
execution, as is most of the project's budget.
The application area of the project directly affects project execution because products
are created during the execution phase. For example, the next-gen DNA-sequencing
instrument from the opening case and all associated software and documentation would
be produced during project execution. The project team would need to use its expertise
in biology, hardware and software development, and testing to create the product
successfully.
The project manager needs to focus on leading the project team and managing
stakeholder relationships to execute the project management plan successfully. Project
resource management, communications management, and stakeholder management
are crucial to a project's success. See Chapters 9, 10, and 13, respectively, for more
information on these knowledge areas. If the project involves a significant amount of
risk or outside resources, the project manager also needs to be well versed in project
risk management and project procurement management. See Chapters 11 and 12
for details on those knowledge areas. Many unique situations occur during project
execution, so project managers must be flexible and creative in dealing with them.
Review the situation that Erica Bell faced during project execution in Chapter 3. Also
review the ResNet case study (available on the Companion website for this text) to
understand the execution challenges that project manager Peeter Kivestu and his
project team faced.
Chapter 4
178
Coordinating Planning and Execution
In project integration management, project planning and execution are intertwined and
inseparable activities. The main function of creating a project management plan is to
guide project execution. A good plan should help produce good products or work results
and should document what constitutes good work results. Updates to plans should reflect
knowledge gained from completing work earlier in the project. Anyone who has tried to
write a computer program from poor specifications appreciates the importance of a good
plan. Anyone who has had to document a poorly programmed system appreciates the
importance of good execution.
A common sense approach to improving the coordination between project plan
development and execution is to follow this simple rule: Those who will do the work
should plan the work. All project personnel need to develop both planning and executing
skills, and they need experience in these areas. In IT projects, programmers who have to
write detailed specifications and then create the code from them become better at writing
specifications. Likewise, most systems analysts begin their careers as programmers, so
they understand what type of analysis and documentation they need to write good code.
Although project managers are responsible for developing the overall project management
plan, they must solicit input from project team members who are developing plans in each
knowledge area.
Providing Strong Leadership and a Supportive Culture
Strong leadership and a supportive organizational culture are crucial during project
execution. Project managers must lead by example to demonstrate the importance
of creating good project plans and then following them in project execution. Project
managers often create plans for things they need to do themselves. If project managers
follow through on their own plans, their team members are more likely to do the same.
W h a t W e n t R i g h t
In Pulse of the Profession: Capturing the Value of Project Management 2015, PMI
found that organizations that excel in project management are indeed capturing business
value. They complete about 80 percent of their projects successfully (defined by meeting
the scope on time and on budget) and waste 13 times less money than low-performing
counterparts. "Their rigorous approach to project, program and portfolio management
improves their ability to execute strategy and creates a competitive advantage."10
The surprising news in this survey of 2,800 global professionals was that only
12 percent of organizations were considered to be high performers, a percentage that
has remained unchanged since 2012. The main industry group surveyed was in IT
(19 percent), followed by financial services (11 percent).
In order to improve, organizations must make some major cultural changes. They
need to make sure that everyone fully understands the value of project management,
require that executive sponsors are fully engaged on projects and programs, and align
their projects to the organization's strategy.
Project Integration Management
179
Good project execution also requires a supportive organizational culture. For
example, organizational procedures can help or hinder project execution. If an
organization has useful guidelines and templates for project management that everyone
in the organization follows, it will be easier for project managers and their teams to plan
and do their work. If the organization uses the project plans as the basis for performing
work and monitoring progress during execution, the culture will promote the relationship
between good planning and execution. On the other hand, if organizations have confusing
or bureaucratic project management guidelines that hinder getting work done or
measuring progress against plans, project managers and their teams will be frustrated.
Even with a supportive organizational culture, project managers may sometimes
find it necessary to break the rules to produce project results in a timely manner. When
project managers break the rules, politics will play a role in the results. For example, if
a particular project requires use of nonstandard software, the project manager must use
political skills to convince concerned stakeholders that using standard software would be
inadequate. Breaking organizational rules-and getting away with it-requires excellent
leadership, communication, and political skills.
Capitalizing on Product, Business, and Application Area Knowledge
In addition to strong leadership, communication, and political skills, project managers
need to possess product, business, and application area knowledge to execute projects
successfully. It is often helpful for IT project managers to have prior technical experience
or at least a working knowledge of IT products. For example, if the project manager were
leading a team to help define user requirements, it would be helpful to understand the
language of the business and technical experts on the team. See Chapter 5, Project Scope
Management, for more information on collecting requirements.
Many IT projects are small, so project managers may be required to perform some
technical work or mentor team members to complete the project. For example, a three-
month project to develop a Web-based application with only three team members would
benefit most from a project manager who can complete some of the technical work. On
larger projects, however, the project manager's primary responsibility is to lead the team
and communicate with key project stakeholders. The project manager does not have
time to do the technical work. In this case, it is usually best that the project manager
understand the business and application area of the project more than the technology
involved.
On very large projects the project manager must understand the business and
application area of the project. For example, Northwest Airlines completed a series of
projects in recent years to develop and upgrade its reservation systems. The company
spent millions of dollars and had more than 70 full-time people working on the projects
at peak periods. The project manager, Peeter Kivestu, had never worked in an IT
department, but he had extensive knowledge of the airline industry and the reservations
process. He carefully picked his team leaders, making sure they had the required technical
and product knowledge. ResNet was the first large IT project at Northwest Airlines led
by a business manager instead of a technical expert, and it was a roaring success. Many
organizations have found that large IT projects require experienced general managers who
understand the business and application area of the technology, not the technology itself.
Chapter 4
180
Project Execution Tools and Techniques
Directing and managing project work requires specialized tools and techniques, some
of which are unique to project management. Project managers can use specific tools
and techniques to perform activities that are part of execution processes. These
include the following:

Expert judgment: Anyone who has worked on a large, complex project
appreciates the importance of expert judgment in making good decisions.
Project managers should not hesitate to consult experts on different topics,
such as what methodology to follow, what programming language to use, and
what training approach to follow.

Meetings: Meetings are crucial during project execution. Face-to-face
meetings with individuals or groups of people are important, as are phone
and virtual meetings. Meetings allow people to develop relationships, pick
up on important body language or tone of voice, and have a dialogue to help
resolve problems. It is often helpful to establish set meeting times for various
stakeholders. For example, Nick could have scheduled a short meeting once a
week with senior managers. He could have also scheduled 10-minute standup
meetings every morning for the project team.

Project management information systems: As described in Chapter 1,
hundreds of project management software products are on the market today.
Many large organizations use powerful enterprise project management
systems that are accessible via the Internet and tie into other systems, such
as financial systems. Even in smaller organizations, project managers or other
team members can create Gantt charts that include links to other planning
documents on an internal network. For example, Nick or his assistant could
have created a detailed Gantt chart for their project in Project 2016 and
created links to other key planning documents created in Word, Excel, or
PowerPoint. Nick could have shown the summary tasks during the progress
review meetings, and if top management had questions, Nick could have
shown them supporting details. Nick's team could also have set baselines for
completing the project and tracked their progress toward achieving those
goals. See Appendix A (available on the Companion website for this text) for
details on using Project 2016 to perform these functions, and for samples of
Gantt charts and other useful outputs from project management software.
Although project management information systems can aid in project execution,
project managers must remember that positive leadership and strong teamwork are
critical to successful project management. Project managers should delegate the detailed
work involved in using these tools to other team members and focus on providing
leadership for the whole project to ensure project success. Stakeholders often focus on the
most important output of execution from their perspective: the deliverables. For example,
a production version of the next-gen DNA-sequencing instrument was the main deliverable
for the project in the opening case. Of course, many other deliverables were created along
the way, such as software modules, tests, and reports. Other outputs of project execution
Project Integration Management
181
include work performance information, change requests, and updates to the project
management plan and project documents.
Project managers and their teams are most often remembered for how well they
executed a project and handled difficult situations. Likewise, sports teams around the
world know that the key to winning is good execution. Team coaches can be viewed as
project managers, with each game a separate project. Coaches are often judged on their
win-loss record, not on how well they planned for each game. On a humorous note, when
one losing coach was asked what he thought about his team's execution, he responded,
"I'm all for it!"
Managing Project Knowledge*
PMI added this new process to the PMBOK Guide in 2017 to highlight the importance of
managing project knowledge. There are two basic types of knowledge:
1. Explicit knowledge: This type of knowledge can be easily explained
using words, pictures, or numbers and is easy to communicate, store,
and distribute. Examples include information found in textbooks and
encyclopedias as well as project documents and plans.
2. Tacit knowledge: Unlike explicit knowledge, tacit knowledge, sometimes
called informal knowledge, is difficult to express and is highly personal.
Examples include beliefs, insight, and experience. It is often shared through
conversations and interactions between people. Many organizations set up
programs like mentorships, communities of practice, or workshops to assist
in passing on tacit knowledge.
Knowledge management should be done before, during, and after projects are
completed. It is often very difficult to accomplish. Organizations can provide explicit
knowledge in writing or other formats, including audio, pictures, and videos. They
can also build a culture of trust and sharing so people work together to pass on tacit
knowledge. One of the main outputs of managing project knowledge is a lessons-learned
register.
A lessons-learned register should document challenges, problems, realized risks
and opportunities, and other content to assist in knowledge management on current
and future projects. Contents can include a lessons learned ID, date identified,
owner, name, category, situation, and recommendation. For example, if Nick from the
opening case documented lessons learned, he might highlight one important lesson
of understanding sponsor expectations, listing himself as the owner, communications
as the category, being offered a severance package as the situation that prompted the
lesson, and a recommendation to ask the project sponsor about expectations on a
regular basis.
It is best if project team members document lessons learned throughout the life
of the project. At the end of the project, all lessons learned should be both discussed
with the team and archived in a lessons learned repository, a key organizational
process asset.
Chapter 4
182
Monitoring and Controlling Project Work
On large projects, many project managers say that 90 percent of the job is communicating
and managing changes. Changes are inevitable on most projects, so it's important to
develop and follow a process to monitor and control changes.
Monitoring project work includes collecting, measuring, and disseminating
performance information. It also involves assessing measurements and analyzing
trends to determine what process improvements can be made. The project team should
continuously monitor project performance to assess the overall health of the project and
identify areas that require special attention.
The project management plan, project documents, work performance information,
agreements, enterprise environmental factors, and organizational process assets are all
important inputs for monitoring and controlling project work.
The project management plan provides the baseline for identifying and controlling
project changes. A baseline is a starting point, a measurement, or an observation that
is documented so that it can be used for future comparison. For example, the project
management plan includes a section that describes the work to perform on a project.
This section of the plan describes the key deliverables for the project, the products of the
project, and quality requirements. The schedule section of the project management plan
lists the planned dates for completing key deliverables, and the budget section of the plan
provides the planned cost of these deliverables. The project team must focus on delivering
the work as planned. If the project team or someone else causes changes during project
execution, the team must revise the project management plan and have it approved by the
project sponsor. Many people refer to different types of baselines, such as a cost baseline
or schedule baseline, to describe different project goals more clearly and performance
toward meeting them.
Schedule and cost forecasts, validated changes, and work performance information
provide details on how project execution is going. The main purpose of this information
is to alert the project manager and project team about issues that are causing problems
or might cause problems in the future. The project manager and project team must
continuously monitor and control project work to decide if corrective or preventive
actions are needed, what the best course of action is, and when to act.
A d v i c e f o r Y o u n g P r o f e s s i o n a l s
Hopefully you are interested in finding and using existing knowledge as well as creat-
ing new knowledge. Many college students excel in this area based on their experiences
doing rigorous coursework. To stand out in your job, consider volunteering to be in
charge of creating your project team's lessons-learned register. You could create a shared
online space where team members and other stakeholders can share information. Be
sure to read through and organize and edit inputs, if needed. Consider pairing up with
a more experienced person to develop something that is of real value to your team and
organization.
Project Integration Management
183
Important outputs of monitoring and controlling project work include change requests
and work performance reports. Change requests include recommended corrective and
preventive actions and defect repairs. Corrective actions should result in improvements in
project performance. Preventive actions reduce the probability of negative consequences
associated with project risks. Defect repairs involve bringing defective deliverables into
conformance with requirements. For example, if project team members have not been
reporting hours that they worked, a corrective action would show them how to enter
the information and let them know that they need to do it. An example of a preventive
action might be modifying a time-tracking system screen to avoid common errors people
have made in the past. A defect repair might be having someone redo an incorrect
entry. Many organizations use a formal change request process and forms to keep track
of project changes, as described in the next section. Work performance reports include
status reports, progress reports, memos, and other documents used to communicate
performance.
M e d i a S n a p s h o t
Few events get more media attention than the Olympic Games. Imagine all the work
involved in planning and executing an event that involves thousands of athletes from
around the world with millions of spectators. The 2002 Olympic Winter Games and
Paralympics took five years to plan and cost more than $1.9 billion. PMI presented the
Salt Lake Organizing Committee (SLOC) with the Project of the Year award for deliver-
ing world-class games that, according to the International Olympic Committee, "made a
profound impact upon the people of the world."11
Four years before the Games began, the SLOC used a Primavera software-based
system with a cascading color-coded WBS to integrate planning. A year before the
Games, the team added a Venue Integrated Planning Schedule to help integrate
resource needs, budgets, and plans. For example, this software helped the team coor-
dinate different areas involved in controlling access into and around a venue, such as
roads, pedestrian pathways, seating and safety provisions, and hospitality areas, saving
nearly $10 million.
When the team experienced a budget deficit three years before the Games, it
separated "must-have" items from "nice-to-have" items and implemented a rigorous
expense approval process. According to Matthew Lehman, SLOC managing director,
using classic project management tools turned a $400 million deficit into a $100 million
surplus.
The SLOC also used an Executive Roadmap, a one-page list of the top 100 activi-
ties during the Games, to keep executives apprised of progress. Activities were tied
to detailed project information within each department's schedule. A 90-day high-
lighter showed which managers were accountable for each integrated activity. Fraser
Bullock, SLOC Chief Operating Officer and Chief, said, "We knew when we were on
and off schedule and where we had to apply additional resources. The interrelation
of the functions meant they could not run in isolation-it was a smoothly running
machine."12
Chapter 4
184
Performing Integrated Change Control
Integrated change control involves identifying, evaluating, and managing changes
throughout the project life cycle. The three main objectives of integrated change
control are as follows:

Influencing the factors that create changes to ensure that changes are
beneficial: To ensure that changes are beneficial and that a project is
successful, project managers and their teams must make trade-offs among
key project dimensions, such as scope, time, cost, and quality.

Determining that a change has occurred: To determine that a change has
occurred, the project manager must know the status of key project areas at
all times. In addition, the project manager must communicate significant
changes to top management and key stakeholders. Top management and
other key stakeholders do not like surprises, especially ones that mean the
project might produce less, take longer to complete, cost more than planned,
or create products of lower quality.

Managing actual changes as they occur: Managing change is a key role of
project managers and their teams. It is important that project managers
exercise discipline in managing the project to help minimize the number of
changes that occur.
Important inputs to the integrated change control process include the project
management plan, project documents, work performance information, change requests,
enterprise environmental factors, and organizational process assets. Important outputs
include approved change requests and updates to the project management plan and
project documents.
Change requests are common on projects and occur in many different forms.
They can be oral or written, formal or informal. For example, a project team member
responsible for installing a server might ask the project manager if it is acceptable to order
a server with a faster processor than planned. The server is from the same manufacturer
and has the same approximate cost. Because this change is positive and should have
no negative effects on the project, the project manager might give a verbal approval at
the progress review meeting. Nevertheless, it is still important that the project manager
document this change to avoid any potential problems. The appropriate team member
should update the scope statement to include the new server specifications.
Still, keep in mind that many change requests can have a major impact on a
project. For example, customers who change their minds about the number of hardware
components they want as part of a project will have a definite impact on its scope and
cost. Such a change might also affect the project's schedule. The project team must
present such significant changes in written form to the project sponsor, and there
should be a formal review process for analyzing and deciding whether to approve these
changes.
Change is unavoidable and often expected on most IT projects. Technologies change,
personnel change, organizational priorities change, and so on. A good change control
system is also important for project success.
Project Integration Management
185
Change Control on IT Projects
From the 1950s to the 1980s, IT was often referred to as data automation or data
processing. At that time, a widely held view of project management was that the project
team should strive to do exactly what it planned, on time and within budget. The problem
with this view was that project teams could rarely meet original project goals, especially
for projects that used new technologies. Stakeholders rarely agreed up front on the scope
of the project or what the finished product should look like. Time and cost estimates
created early in a project were rarely accurate.
Beginning in the 1990s, most project managers and top management realized that
project management is a process of constant communication and negotiation about
project objectives and stakeholder expectations. This view assumes that changes happen
throughout the project life cycle and recognizes that changes are often beneficial to some
projects. For example, if a project team member discovers a new hardware or software
technology that could satisfy customers' needs for less time and money, the project team
and key stakeholders should be open to making major changes in the project.
All projects will have some changes, and managing them is a key issue in project manage-
ment, especially for IT projects. Many IT projects involve the use of hardware and software
that is updated frequently. To continue the example from earlier in this section, the initial
plan for ordering the server might have identified a model that used cutting-edge technol-
ogy at the time. If the actual server order occurred six months later, it is quite possible that a
more powerful server could be available at the same cost. This example illustrates a positive
change. On the other hand, the server manufacturer specified in the project plan could go out
of business, which would result in a negative change. IT project managers should be accus-
tomed to such changes and build some flexibility into their project plans and execution. Cus-
tomers for IT projects should also be open to meeting project objectives in different ways.
Some changes might make sense but be too large to fit into a current project.
Remember that projects have scope, time, cost, and other goals, and changes often affect
those goals. If the organization wants to meet time and cost goals, for example, it must
control changes to the project's scope. Organizations often decide to document some
change requests and include them in an upgrade to the current project.
Even if project managers, project teams, and customers are flexible, it is important
that projects have a formal change control system. This formal system is necessary to plan
for managing change.
Change Control System
A change control system is a formal, documented process that describes when and how
official project documents may be changed. It also describes the people authorized to
make changes, the paperwork required for these changes, and any automated or manual
tracking systems the project will use. A change control system often includes a change
control board, configuration management, and a process for communicating changes.
A change control board (CCB) is a formal group of people responsible for approving
or rejecting changes to a project. The primary functions of a CCB are to provide
guidelines for preparing change requests, evaluating change requests, and managing the
implementation of approved changes. An organization could have key stakeholders for the
Chapter 4
186
entire organization on this board, and a few members could rotate based on the unique
needs of each project. By creating a formal board and a process for managing changes,
overall change control should improve.
However, CCBs can have some drawbacks, such as the time it takes to make decisions
on proposed changes. CCBs often meet only once a week or once a month and may
not make decisions in one meeting. Some organizations have streamlined processes for
making quick decisions on smaller project changes. One company created a "48-hour
policy," in which task leaders on a large IT project would reach agreements on key
decisions or changes within their expertise and authority. The person in the area most
affected by this decision or change then had 48 hours to go to top management and seek
approval. If the project team's decision could not be implemented for some reason, the top
manager consulted would have 48 hours to reverse the decision; otherwise, the project
team's decision was approved. This type of process is an effective way to deal with the
many time-sensitive decisions or changes that project teams must make on IT projects.
Configuration management is another important part of integrated change control.
Configuration management ensures that the descriptions of the project's products are
correct and complete. It involves identifying and controlling the functional and physical
design characteristics of products and their support documentation. Members of the
project team, frequently called configuration management specialists, are often assigned
to perform configuration management for large projects. Their job is to identify and
document the functional and physical characteristics of the project's products, control any
changes to such characteristics, record and report the changes, and audit the products
to verify conformance to requirements. Visit the Institute of Configuration Management's
website (www.icmhq.com) for more information on this topic.
G l o b a l I s s u e s
Rapid changes in technology, such as the increased use of mobile roaming for com-
munications, often cause governments around the world to take action. Incompatible
hardware, software, and networks can make communications difficult in some regions,
and a lack of competition can cause prices to soar. Fortunately, a group called the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) promotes policies
that will improve the economic and social well-being of people around the world. In
February 2012, the OECD called upon its members' governments to boost competition
in international mobile roaming markets. "The OECD has detailed a series of measures
that, if implemented would, it says: 'encourage effective competition, raise consumer
awareness and protection and ensure fairer prices.' If these fail to produce results it says:
'Governments should consider price regulation for roaming services,' and that 'Whole-
sale roaming services could be regulated by means of bilateral or multilateral wholesale
agreements with mutually established price caps.'"13
OECD also encourages expansion of other technologies. By the end of 2013, wire-
less broadband penetration grew to 72.4 percent in the 34-country OECD area. Strong
demand for smartphones and tablets helped wireless broadband subscriptions grow by
14.6 percent.14 Wireless broadband penetration continues to grow globally, thanks in
part to these agreements.
Project Integration Management
187
Another critical factor in change control is communication. Project managers
should use written and oral performance reports to help identify and manage project
changes. For example, on software development projects, most programmers must
make their edits to a copy of the master file in a database; to ensure version control,
programmers must "check out" the file to edit it. If two programmers are allowed to
check out the same file, they must coordinate to merge their changes. In addition to
written or formal communication methods, oral and informal communications are
also important. Some project managers have stand-up meetings once a week or even
every morning, depending on the nature of the project. The goal of a stand-up meeting
is to quickly communicate what is most important for the project. For example, the
project manager might have a stand-up meeting every morning with all of the team
leaders. There might be a stand-up meeting every Monday morning with all interested
stakeholders. Requiring participants to stand keeps meetings short and forces everyone
to focus on the most important project events.
Why is good communication so critical to success? One of the most frustrating
aspects of project change is not having everyone coordinated and informed about the
latest project information. Again, it is the project manager's responsibility to integrate all
project changes so that the project stays on track. The project manager and staff members
must develop a system for notifying everyone affected by a change in a timely manner.
E-mail, real-time databases, cell phones, and the Web make it easy to disseminate the
most current project information. You will learn more about good communication in
Chapter 10, Project Communications Management.
Table 4-4 lists suggestions for performing integrated change control. As described
earlier, project management is a process of constant communication and negotiation.
Project managers should plan for changes and use appropriate tools and techniques, such
as a change control board, configuration management, and good communication. It is
helpful to define procedures for making timely decisions about small changes, use written
and oral performance reports to help identify and manage changes, and use software to
assist in planning, updating, and controlling projects. An IT steering committee can also
View project management as a process of constant communication and negotiation.
Plan for change.
Establish a formal change control system, including a change control board (CCB) and
IT steering committee.
Use effective configuration management.
Define procedures for making timely decisions about smaller changes.
Use written and oral performance reports to help identify and manage change.
Use project management software and other software to help manage and
communicate changes.
Focus on leading the project team and meeting overall project goals and expectations.
Table 4-4  Suggestions for performing integrated change control
Chapter 4
188
be used to represent the entire IT Portfolio-a key consideration in change management,
especially when resources must shift to accommodate approved changes. In addition,
shifts in strategic direction by the IT steering committee can reach down to influence
existing projects, actually creating changes.
Project managers must also provide strong leadership to steer the project to successful
completion. They must not get too involved in managing project changes. Project
managers should delegate much of the detailed work to project team members and focus
on providing overall leadership for the project in general. Remember, project managers
must focus on the big picture and perform project integration management well to lead
their team and organization to success.
Closing Projects or Phases
The last process in project integration management is closing the project or phase, which
requires that you finalize all activities and transfer the completed or cancelled work to
the appropriate people. The main inputs to this process are the project charter, project
management plan, project documents, accepted deliverables, business documents,
agreements, procurement documentation, and organizational process assets. The main
tools and techniques are expert judgment, data analysis, and meetings. The outputs of
closing projects are as follows:

Project documents updates: All project documents should be reviewed and
marked as final versions. Others may need to refer to these documents in the
future, and it's important that they be accurate.

Final product, service, or result transition: Project sponsors are usually
most interested in making sure they receive delivery of the final products,
services, or results they expected when they authorized the project. For
items produced under contract, formal acceptance or handover includes a
written statement that the terms of the contract were met. Internal projects
can also include some type of project completion form.

Final report: A final project report and presentation are also commonly used
during project closing. The PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition suggests the final
report include the following topics:

Summary level description of the project or phase

Scope objectives, the criteria used to evaluate the scope, and evidence
that the completion criteria were met

Quality objectives, the criteria used to evaluate the project and product
quality, and the verification and validation information

Schedule objectives, including planned and actual milestone delivery
dates and reasons for variances

Cost objectives, including the acceptable cost range, actual costs, and
reasons for variances

Summary of how the final project, service, or result achieved the benefits
that the project was undertaken to address.
Project Integration Management
189

Summary of how the final project, service, or result achieved the
business needs identified in the business plan.

Summary of any risks or issues encountered on the project and how they
were addressed

Organizational process asset updates: The project team should provide
a list of project documentation, project closure documents, and historical
information produced by the project in a useful format. This information
is considered a process asset. Project teams normally produce a final
project report, which often includes a transition plan describing work to be
done as part of operations after the project is completed. Teams also often
write a lessons-learned report at the end of a project, and this information
can be a tremendous asset for future projects. (See Chapter 10, Project
Communications Management, for more information on creating final project
reports, lessons-learned reports, and other project communications.) Several
organizations also conduct a post-implementation review to analyze whether
the project achieved what it set out to do. Information from this type of
review also becomes an organizational process asset for future projects.
Using Software to Assist in Project Integration
Management
As described throughout this chapter, project teams can use various types of software to
assist in project integration management. Project teams can create documents with word-
processing software, give presentations with presentation software, track information with
spreadsheets, databases, or customized software, and transmit information using various
types of communication software.
Project management software is also an important tool for developing and integrating
project planning documents, executing the project management plan and related project
plans, monitoring and controlling project activities, and performing integrated change
control. Small project teams can use low-end or midrange project management software
to coordinate their work. For large projects, such as the Olympic Games described in the
Media Snapshot earlier in this chapter, organizations may benefit most from high-end
tools that provide enterprise project management capabilities and integrate all aspects of
project management.
As you learned in Chapter 1, organizations can also use software to assist in project
portfolio management and optimization. Portfolio management software often provides
many types of charts or dashboards to help managers see the big picture in managing
portfolios of projects. For example, Figure 4-8 shows a project dashboard from the
software ProjectManager. Students can get a free 120-day trial of this software from
www.projectmanager.com. All projects can benefit from using some type of project
management information system to coordinate and communicate project information.
In recent years, the growth of cloud computing has transformed how, when, and
where people work. Many project management software tools are now available in the
Chapter 4
190
cloud, as are other tools and services. Most business professionals and students now store
their files using some type of cloud storage (Google Drive, Microsoft OneDrive, DropBox,
etc.). Many cloud tools are accessible via smartphones and tablets as well as laptops and
desktops. Cloud computing enables users to easily access and share information from
any location at any time. Project integration management is not easy, but the cloud has
definitely helped provide easier access to important information and applications.
Considerations for Agile/Adaptive Environments
The PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition includes a short section with this title for
each knowledge area. The following information is provided for project integration
management:
Iterative and agile approaches promote the engagement of team members as local
domain experts in integration management. The team members determine how plans
and components should integrate.
The expectations of the project manager as noted in the Key Concepts for Integration
Management do not change in an adaptive environment, but control of the detailed
product planning and delivery is delegated to the team. The project manager's focus
is on building a collaborative decision-making environment and ensuring that the
team has the ability to respond to changes. This collaborative approach can be fur-
ther enhanced when team members possess a broad skill base rather than a narrow
specialization.16
Figure 4-8  Sample portfolio management software screens
Source: www.projectmanager.com
Project Integration Management
191
For many large, traditional projects, several team members are not directly involved
in integration management and do have specialized skills. It is up to the project managers
and their team leads to focus on integration while team members focus on completing
often complex, technical tasks. This does not mean that they should not contribute to
project planning. As emphasized in this chapter, those who do the work should help plan
the work.
Project managers using any product life cycle should focus on creating a collaborative
decision-making environment and providing opportunities for team members to develop
additional skills. Recall that the Agile Manifesto values the following:

Individuals and interactions over processes and tools

Working software over comprehensive documentation

Customer collaboration over contract negotiation

Responding to change over following a plan
As you can see, a lot of work is involved in project integration management. Project
managers and their teams must focus on pulling all the elements of a project together to
successfully complete it.
C a s e W r a p - U p
Without consulting Nick Carson or his team, Nick's CEO hired a new person, Jim Lansing,
to act as a middle manager between himself and the people in Nick's department. The
CEO and other top managers really liked Jim; he met with them often, shared ideas, and
had a great sense of humor. He started developing standards that the company could use
to help manage projects in the future. For example, he developed templates for creating
plans and progress reports and put them on the company's intranet. However, Jim and
Nick did not get along, especially after Nick heard that Jim told the CEO that he was
hard to work with and preoccupied with the birth of his son.
Nick was very frustrated after hearing this and stormed into the CEO's office. The
CEO suggested that Nick move to another department, but Nick did not like that so the
CEO offered Nick a severance package to leave the company. Because of the planned
corporate buyout, the CEO knew the company might have to let some people go any-
way. Nick talked the CEO into giving him a two-month sabbatical he had earned plus a
higher percentage on his stock options. After discussing the situation with his wife and
realizing that he would get over $70,000 if he resigned, Nick took the severance package.
The CEO called a meeting with Nick and Jim to give them both advice. He told Nick that
he was one of the best technical people he ever worked with and that he would thrive in
another organization in a technical role. He told Jim that he was a great organizer, but he
had to learn to respect technical people more. They all left the meeting with a feeling of
mutual respect.
Chapter 4
192
Chapter Summary
Project integration management is usually the most important project management knowledge
area, because it ties together all the other areas of project management. A project manager's
primary focus should be on project integration management.
Before selecting projects to pursue, it is important for organizations to follow a strategic
planning process. Many organizations perform a SWOT analysis to help identify potential
projects based on their strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats. IT projects
should support the organization's overall business strategy. Common techniques for
selecting projects include focusing on broad organizational needs, categorizing projects,
performing financial analyses, developing weighted scoring models, and using balanced
scorecards.
Project integration management includes the following processes:

Developing the project charter, which involves working with stakeholders to create
the document that formally authorizes a project. Project charters can have different
formats, but they should include basic project information and signatures of key
stakeholders.

Creating an assumption log to document and track assumptions throughout the life of
the project.

Developing the project management plan, which involves coordinating all planning
efforts to create a consistent, coherent document. The main purpose of project plans is
to facilitate action.

Directing and managing project work, which involves carrying out the project plans
by performing the activities included in it. Project plan execution usually requires the
majority of a project's budget.

Managing project knowledge, which involves using existing knowledge and creating
new knowledge to achieve project objectives while also contributing to organizational
learning.

Monitoring and controlling project work, which is necessary to meet the performance
objectives of the project. The project team should continuously monitor project
performance to assess the overall health of the project.

Performing integrated change control, which involves identifying, evaluating, and
managing changes throughout the project life cycle. A change control system often
includes a change control board (CCB), configuration management, and a process for
communicating changes.

Closing the project or phase involves finalizing all project activities. It is important to
follow good procedures to ensure that all project activities are completed and that the
project sponsor accepts delivery of the final products, services, or results.
Several types of software products are available to assist in project integration management.
Be sure to consider how project integration management can differ in agile/adaptive
environments.
Project Integration Management
193
Discussion Questions
1. Describe project integration management. How does it relate to the project life cycle,
stakeholders, and the other project management knowledge areas?
2. Describe options that organizations have for selecting projects that align with their mission
or strategy, and describe how each might work differently in the selection of IT projects.
3. Summarize key work involved in each of the six processes of project integration management.
4. Either from your own experience or by searching the Internet, describe a well-planned and
executed project. Describe a failed project. What elements of project integration might have
contributed to the success or failure of each?
5. Discuss the importance of following a well-integrated change control process on IT projects.
What consequences can result from not following these best practices? What types of
change control would be appropriate for small IT projects? What types of change control
would be appropriate for large ones?
Quick Quiz
1. Which of the following processes is not part of project integration management?
a.
Developing the project business case
b.
Developing the project charter
c.
Developing the project management plan
d.
Closing the project or phase
2. What is the last step in the four-stage planning process for selecting IT projects?
a.
IT strategy planning
b.
Business area analysis
c.
Mind mapping
d.
Resource allocation
3. Which of the following is not a best practice for new product development projects?
a.
Aligning projects and resources with business strategy
b.
Selecting projects that will take less than two years to provide payback
c.
Focusing on customer needs in identifying projects
d.
Assigning project managers to lead projects
4. A new government law requires an organization to report data in a new way. Which of the
following categories would include a new information system project to provide this data?
a.
Problem
b.
Opportunity
c.
Directive
d.
Regulation
Chapter 4
194
5. If estimates for total discounted benefits for a project are $120,000 and total discounted
costs are $100,000, what is the estimated return on investment (ROI)?
a.
$20,000
b.
$120,000
c.
20 percent
d.
120 percent
6. A ____________ is a document that formally recognizes the existence of a project and
provides direction on the project's objectives and management.
a.
project charter
b.
contract
c.
business case
d.
project management plan
7. Which of the following items is not normally included in a project charter?
a.
The name of the project manager
b.
Budget information
c.
Stakeholder signatures
d.
A Gantt chart
8. ____________ ensures that the descriptions of the project's products are correct and
complete.
a.
Configuration management
b.
Integrated change control
c.
Integration management
d.
A change control board
9. Which of the following is not a suggestion for performing integrated change control?
a.
Use good configuration management.
b.
Minimize change.
c.
Establish a formal change control system.
d.
View project management as a process of constant communication and negotiation.
10. What tool and technique is used for all processes of project integration management?
a.
Project management software
b.
Templates
c.
Expert judgment
d.
All of the above
Quick Quiz Answers
1. a; 2. d; 3. b; 4. c; 5. c; 6. a; 7. d; 8. a; 9. b; 10. c
Project Integration Management
195
Exercises
1. Write a short paper based on the chapter's opening case. Answer the following questions:
a. What do you think the real problem was in this case?
b. Does the case present a realistic scenario? Why or why not?
c. Was Nick Carson a good project manager? Why or why not?
d. What should top management have done to help Nick?
e. What could Nick have done to be a better project manager?
2. Download a free trial of MindView mind mapping software from www.matchware.com or
similar software and create a mind map of a SWOT analysis for your organization. Include
at least two strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats, and then provide ideas for
at least three potential projects. Or, you can use your college or university for the SWOT
analysis, focusing on what it can do to improve services for students.
3. Use spreadsheet software to create Figures 4-4 through Figure 4-7 in this text. Make sure
your formulas work correctly.
4. Perform a financial analysis for a project using the format provided in Figure 4-5. Assume
that the projected costs and benefits for this project are spread over four years as follows:
Estimated costs are $300,000 in Year 1 and $40,000 each year in Years 2, 3, and 4.
Estimated benefits are $0 in Year 1 and $120,000 each year in Years 2, 3, and 4. Use a
7 percent discount rate, and round the discount factors to two decimal places. Create a
spreadsheet or use the business case financials template on the Companion website to
calculate and clearly display the NPV, ROI, and year in which payback occurs. In addition,
write a paragraph explaining whether you would recommend investing in this project, based
on your financial analysis.
5. Create a weighted scoring model to determine grades for a course. Final grades are based
on three exams worth 15 percent, 15 percent, and 25 percent, respectively; homework is
worth 15 percent; and a group project is worth 30 percent. Enter scores for three students.
Assume that Student 1 earns 100 percent (or 100) on every item. Assume that Student 2
earns 70 percent on each of the exams, 80 percent on the homework, and 95 percent on
the group project. Assume that Student 3 earns 90 percent on Exam 1, 80 percent on Exam 2,
75 percent on Exam 3, 80 percent on the homework, and 70 percent on the group project.
You can use the weighted scoring model template, create your own spreadsheet, or make
the matrix by hand.
6. Develop an outline (major headings and subheadings only) for a project management
plan to create a mobile-friendly website for your class, and then fill in the details for the
introduction or overview section. Assume that this website would include a home page with
links to a syllabus for the class, lecture notes or other instructional information, links to the
website for this textbook, links to other websites with project management information, and
links to personal pages for each member of your class and future classes. Also, include
a bulletin board and chat room feature where students and the instructor can exchange
information. Assume that your instructor is the project sponsor, you are the project manager,
your classmates are your project team, and you have three months to complete the project.
Chapter 4
196
7. Research software mentioned in this chapter, such as software for assisting in project
selection, enterprise project management software, or cloud-based applications.
Find at least two references and summarize your findings in a short memo to senior
management.
8. Watch videos and read articles to research how two different organizations did a good job in
directing and managing project work. You can search "PMI Project of the Year award" to find
examples. Find at least four references and summarize your findings in a short paper.
9. Read the report "2015 Pulse of the Profession: Capturing the Value of Project Management"
by PMI, mentioned in the What Went Right feature. Summarize key points in this study
and your opinion of it. Describe some specific steps organizations can take to provide a
supportive culture for project management.
10. Find two recent articles related to managing project knowledge. Summarize your findings in
a short paper.
Running Case
Note: Additional running cases are provided on the Companion website, including the Manage
Your Health, Inc. case from the seventh edition of this text, now with updated tasks based on this
edition. Template files are also available on the Companion website. This running case starts
here and continues through Chapter 13. Tasks based on this case are explained in the following
Tasks section; throughout the book, these tasks will build on work done in previous chapters and
scenarios.
Economic inequality is a huge issue. A recent study found that the world's 80 wealthiest
individuals own as much as the entire world's poorest 3.5 billion people. The richest 1 percent of
the world's population control half of the world's total wealth.15 Many individuals, corporations,
charities, and government agencies have projects and programs in place to attempt to tackle
this and other important global issues such as sustainability, but there are many opportunities to
do more.
A grassroots group of college students has decided to work together to do their part in
making the world a better place. The students are from many different countries, and several
of them met at global conferences, through study abroad experiences, or on various Internet
groups. Strategic goals of this group include developing skills for both college students and for
needy populations, sharing information on existing products and services that promote economic
growth and sustainability, and promoting entrepreneurship. Leaders of this group were reviewing
some ideas for projects (all with a significant IT component) that they could do to support their
strategic goals:
1. Global Treps: Many people are familiar with the television show called Shark Tank where
entrepreneurs (sometimes called "treps") present their business ideas to a group of investors
or sharks. Several colleges, high schools, and even elementary schools throughout the
world hold unique versions of a shark tank like event. You believe that creating a non-
profit organization with one central mobile-friendly website/application to assist groups in
organizing these types of events would spark even more entrepreneurs throughout the
world. You would plan to hold several shark tank like events during the term of the project
Project Integration Management
197
and create a site and applications to help continue developing more global treps. This site/
application would include the following capabilities:

Provide guidelines and templates for running a shark tank type of event.

Accept donations from potential investors targeted toward specific schools or
organizations wishing to host an event (similar to the popular www.donorschoose.org
site where people can fund teacher's requests).

Accept ideas for needed new products or services.

Provide the ability for organizations to create their own custom site to solicit local
participants and sharks, accept applications, and promote the winners as well as losers.

Research ideas for a mechanism where a certain percentage of all donations and
profits earned by contestants are donated back to the Global Treps organization.

Provide an online version of the events by showing videos of contestants and live
reactions of the sharks while also getting live inputs and donations from viewers.
2. Change the Laws Campaign: Launch a global campaign to change laws to reduce further
income inequality and promote social responsibility. This project would also involve creating
a mobile-friendly website/application that would include information about current and
proposed laws, allow discussions of potential ideas to change laws, organize people to
contact appropriate lawmakers, etc.
3. Wealthy Unite: Develop a system to enable the richest people in the world to provide their
input on how they can make the world a better place. Provide information on what several
people are currently doing (i.e., Bill Gates, Warren Buffet, famous celebrities, etc.) to
promote philanthropy. Allow others to donate to suggested causes and recommend other
ways to reduce economic inequality.
4. Global Smart Shoppers: Develop a mobile app and website that recommends products and
services produced by organizations that promote social responsibility. Customize the app
so it works in any country in the user's desired language. Work with large companies that
do not currently sell products or services in certain countries to expand to regions in need.
Allow small companies to easily add their products and services to the shopping network.
Tasks
1. Summarize each of the proposed projects using a simple table format suitable for
presentation to top management. Include the name of each project, identify how each one
supports business strategies, assess the potential financial benefits and other benefits of
each project, and provide your initial assessment of the value of each project. Write your
results in a one-to two-page memo to top management, including appropriate back-up
information and calculations.
2. Evaluate the four projects by preparing a weighted scoring model using the template
provided on the Companion website for this text. Develop at least four criteria, assign
weights to each criterion, assign scores, and then calculate the weighted scores. Print the
spreadsheet and bar chart with the results. Also write a one-page paper that describes this
weighted scoring model and the results.
Chapter 4
198
3. Prepare a business case for the Global Treps project. Assume that the project will take six
months to complete, use many volunteer hours, and cost about $130,000 for hardware,
software, travel, and labor. Use the business case template provided on the Companion
website for this text. Be sure to research information on the television show and events held
by colleges and other groups, which have been sparked by the need for more successful
entrepreneurs. Also visit DonorsChoose.org to see how that site operates and look into
steps for forming a non profit organization.
4. Prepare a draft project charter and an assumption log for the Global Treps project. Assume
that the project will take six months to complete and have a budget of $130,000. Use the
project charter template provided in this text and the sample project charter provided in
Table 4-1 as guides. For the assumption log, document at least two assumptions including
an assumption ID, date, source, category, description, and status. You will be the project
manager, and Dr. K. will be the project sponsor. Other team members will include Bobby,
Ashok, Kim, and Alfreda. You plan to hold four shark tank like events plus develop the Global
Treps site and application.
5. Start a lessons learned register to document knowledge learned on this project. Include
la lessons learned ID, date, source, category, description, impact, recommendations, and
proposed actions. Be creative in then making two entries.
6. Prepare a change request for the Global Treps project, using the template provided on the
Companion website for this text. Assume that you have decided not to provide an online
version of the show as it would be too much work for the initial project. Be creative when
making up information.
Key Terms
balanced scorecard
baseline
capitalization rate
cash flow
change control board (CCB)
change control system
configuration management
cost of capital
directives
discount factor
discount rate
explicit knowledge
integrated change control
interface management
internal rate of return (IRR)
mind mapping
net present value (NPV) analysis
opportunities
opportunity cost of capital
organizational process assets
payback period
problems
project charter
project integration management
project management plan
required rate of return
return on investment (ROI)
strategic planning
SWOT analysis
tacit knowledge
weighted scoring model
Project Integration Management
199
End Notes

1 Robert N. Charette, "2018's IT Failures Already Have a Familiar Look," IEEE Spectrum
(January 9, 2018).

2 James Bacon, "The Use of Decision Criteria in Selecting Information Systems/Technology
Investments," MIS Quarterly, Vol. 16, No. 3 (September 1992), pp. 335-353.

3 Charles McLellan, "IT budgets 2017-18: What the surveys tell us," ZDNet
(September 29, 2017).

4 CIO Magazine, "CIO Magazine Tech Poll Reveals Topline Revenue Growth Is the Top
Business Priority" (February 21, 2012).

5 Clay Chandler et al., "Fortune Business by Design," Fortune (December 22, 2017).

6 Dennis J. Cohen and Robert J. Graham, The Project Manager's MBA (San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass, 2001), p. 31.

7 Jake Widman, "Big IT to Small Biz: Listen Up, Little Dudes!" Computerworld (January 24,
2008).

8 Balanced Scorecard Institute, "Balanced Scorecard Basics," http://www
.balancedscorecard.org (accessed January 9, 2018).

9 Fragan Milosevic and A. Ozbay, "Delivering Projects: What the Winners Do," Proceedings of
the Project Management Institute Annual Seminars & Symposium (November 2001).

10 Project Management Institute, 2015 Pulse of the Profession: Capturing the Value of Project
Management (February 2015).

11 Ross Foti, "The Best Winter Olympics, Period," PM Network (January 2004), p. 23.

12 Ibid., p. 23.

13 Stuart Corner, "Governments Must Act to Cut Mobile Roaming Costs, Says OECD," ITWire
(February 22, 2012).

14 OECD, "OECD Broadband Statistics Update" (July 22, 2014).

15 Deborah Hardoon, "Wealth: Having It All and Wanting More," Oxfam International (January
2015).

16 Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of
Knowledge (PMBOK Guide) - Sixth Edition (2017), p. 74.

C h a p t e r 5
Project Scope
Management
L e a r n i n g O b j e c t i v e s
After reading this chapter, you will be able to:

List key reasons why good project scope management is important

Describe the process of planning scope management

Discuss methods for collecting and documenting requirements to meet
stakeholder needs and expectations

Explain the scope definition process and describe the contents of a proj-
ect scope statement

Discuss the process for creating a work breakdown structure using the
analogy, top-down, bottom-up, and mind-mapping approaches

Explain the importance of validating scope and how it relates to defining
and controlling scope

Given an information technology (IT) project situation, show how recom-
mended approaches for controlling scope can improve the potential for
project success

Describe how software can assist in project scope management

Discuss considerations for agile/adaptive environments
Chapter 5
202
What is Project Scope Management?
Many of the factors associated with project success, such as user involvement, clear
business objectives, and optimized scope, are elements of project scope management.
A critically important and difficult aspect of project management is defining the
scope of a project. Scope refers to all the work involved in creating the products of the
project and the processes used to create them. Recall from Chapter 2 that a deliverable
is a product created as part of a project. Deliverables can be product related, such as a
piece of hardware or software, or process related, such as a planning document or meeting
minutes. Project stakeholders must agree what the products of the project are and, to
some extent, how they should be produced to define all of the deliverables.
Project scope management includes the processes involved in defining and
controlling what work is or is not included in a project. It ensures that the project team
and stakeholders have the same understanding of what products the project will produce
and what processes the project team will use to produce them. Six main processes are
involved in project scope management:
1. Planning scope management involves determining how the project's scope
and requirements will be managed.
2. Collecting requirements involves defining and documenting the features and
functions of the products as well as the processes used for creating them.
O p e n i n g C a s e
Kim Nguyen was leading a meeting to create the work breakdown structure (WBS) for
her company's IT upgrade project. This project was necessary because of several high-
priority, Internet-based applications the company was developing. The IT upgrade
project involved creating and implementing a plan to make all employees' IT assets meet
new corporate standards within nine months. These standards specified the minimum
requirements for each desktop or laptop computer, including the type of processor,
amount of memory, hard disk size, type of network connection, security features, and
software. Kim knew that to perform the upgrades, the project team would first have to
create a detailed inventory of all the current hardware, networks, and software in the
entire company of 2,000 employees.
Kim had worked with other stakeholders to develop a project charter and initial
scope statement. The project charter included rough cost and schedule estimates for the
project and signatures of key stakeholders; the initial scope statement provided a start in
defining the hardware, software, and network requirements as well as other information
related to the project scope. Kim called a meeting with her project team and other
stakeholders to further define the scope of the project. She wanted to get everyone's ideas
on what the project involved, who would do what, and how they could avoid scope creep.
The company's new CEO, Walter Schmidt, was known for keeping a close eye on major
projects. The company had started using a new project management information system
that let everyone know the status of projects at a detailed and high level. Kim knew that
a good WBS was the foundation for scope, time, and cost performance, but she had never
led a team in creating one or allocating costs based on a WBS. Where should she begin?
Project Scope Management
203
3. Defining scope involves reviewing the scope management plan, project
charter, requirements documents, and organizational process assets to create
a scope statement, adding more information as requirements are developed
and change requests are approved.
4. Creating the WBS involves subdividing the major project deliverables into
smaller, more manageable components.
5. Validating scope involves formalizing acceptance of the project deliverables.
Key project stakeholders, such as the customer and sponsor for the project,
inspect and then formally accept the deliverables during this process. If the
deliverables are not acceptable, the customer or sponsor usually requests
changes.
6. Controlling scope involves controlling changes to project scope throughout
the life of the project-a challenge on many IT projects. Scope changes often
influence the team's ability to meet project time and cost goals, so project
managers must carefully weigh the costs and benefits of scope changes.
Figure 5-1 summarizes the inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of project scope
management.
Planning Scope Management
The first step in project scope management is planning how the scope will be managed
throughout the life of the project. After reviewing the project management plan, project
charter, enterprise environmental factors, and organizational process assets, the project
team uses expert judgment, data analysis, and meetings to develop two important outputs:
the scope management plan and the requirements management plan.
The scope management plan is a subsidiary part of the project management plan, as
described in Chapter 4, Project Integration Management. It can be informal and broad or
formal and detailed, based on the needs of the project. In fact, small projects may not need
a written scope management plan, but large projects or highly technical projects often
benefit from one. In general, a scope management plan includes the following information:

How to prepare a detailed project scope statement: For example, are there
templates or guidelines to follow? How much detail is needed to describe
each deliverable?

How to create a WBS: It is often difficult to create a good WBS. This section
of the scope management plan would provide suggestions, samples, and
resources for creating a WBS.

How to maintain and approve the WBS: The initial WBS often changes,
and project team members disagree on what should be included. The scope
management plan describes guidelines for maintaining the WBS and getting
approval for it.

How to obtain formal acceptance of the completed project deliverables:
It is extremely important to understand the process for obtaining formal
acceptance of completed deliverables, especially for projects in which
payments are based on formal acceptance.
Chapter 5
204

How to control requests for changes to the project scope: This process is
related to performing integrated change control, as described in Chapter 4.
Organizations often have guidelines for submitting, evaluating, and approving
changes to scope, and this section of the scope management plan would
specify how to handle change requests for the project.
Another important output of planning scope management is the requirements
management plan. Before you learn about the contents of this document, it is important
to understand what requirements are. The 1990 IEEE Standard Glossary of Software
Engineering Terminology defines a requirement as follows:
Figure 5-1  Project scope management overview
5.1 Plan Scope
Management
5.4 Create WBS
5.5 Validate Scope
5.6 Control Scope
.1 Inputs
.1 Project charter
.2 Project management plan
.3 Enterprise environmental
factors
.4 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Data analysis
.3 Meetings
.3 Outputs
.1 Scope management plan
.2 Requirements management
plan
.1 Inputs
.1 Project charter
.2 Project management plan
.3 Project documents
.4 Business documents
.5 Agreements
.6 Enterprise environmental
factors
.7 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Data gathering
.3 Data analysis
.4 Decision making
.5 Data representation
.6 Interpersonal and team
skills
.7 Context diagram
.8 Prototypes
.3 Outputs
.1 Requirements
documentation
.2 Requirements traceability
marix
.1 Inputs
.1 Project charter
.2 Project management plan
.3 Project documents
.4 Enterprise environmental
factors
.5 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Data analysis
.3 Decision making
.4 Interpersonal and team
skills
.5 Product analysis
.3 Outputs
.1 Project scope statement
.2 Project documents updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Enterprise environmental
factors
.4 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Decomposition
.3 Outputs
.1 Scope baseline
.2 Project documents updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Veriﬁed deliverables
.4 Work performance data
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Inspection
.2 Decision making
.3 Outputs
.1 Accepted deliverables
.2 Work performance
information
.3 Change requests
.4 Project documents updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Work performance data
.4 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Data analysis
.3 Outputs
.1 Work performance
information
.2 Change requests
.3 Project management plan
updates
.4 Project documents updates
5.2 Collect
Requirements
5.3 Deﬁne Scope
Project Scope Management
Overview
Source: PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition. Project Management Institute, Inc.
(2017). Copyright and all rights reserved. Material from this publication has
been reproduced with permission of PMI.
Project Scope Management
205
1. A condition or capability needed by a user to solve a problem or achieve an
objective.
2. A condition or capability that must be met or possessed by a system or
system component to satisfy a contract, standard, specification, or other
formally imposed document.
3. A documented representation of a condition or capability as in 1 or 2.1
The PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition, defines a requirement as "a condition or
capability that is necessary to be present in a product, service, or result to satisfy
a business need." It further explains that requirements "include the quantified and
documented needs and expectations of the sponsor, customer, and other stakeholders.
These requirements need to be elicited, analyzed, and recorded in enough detail to be
included in the scope baseline and be measured once project execution begins."2
For example, the chapter's opening case describes a project for upgrading IT assets
to meet corporate standards. These standards specify the minimum requirements for
each laptop, such as the type of processor, amount of memory, and hard disk size.
The documented requirements for this project, therefore, might state that all laptops
include a specific type of processor, a minimum amount of memory, and a minimum
hard drive size.
For software projects, it is helpful to divide requirements development into the software
engineering steps called elicitation, analysis, specification, and validation. These steps
include all the activities involved in gathering, evaluating, and documenting requirements
for a software or software-containing product. It is also important to use an iterative
approach to defining requirements because they are often unclear early in a project.
The requirements management plan documents how project requirements will be
analyzed, documented, and managed. A requirements management plan can include the
following information:

How to plan, track, and report requirements activities

How to perform configuration management activities

How to prioritize requirements

How to use product metrics

How to trace and capture attributes of requirements
W h a t W e n t R i g h t ?
Several studies cite how difficult it is to manage requirements. Finding qualified people-
business analysts-to do the job is equally difficult. The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
has projected the number of jobs for business analysts to increase 19 percent by 2022.3
A PMI survey found that only 49 percent of respondents had the resources in place to do
requirements management properly and 53 percent failed to use a formal process to vali-
date requirements.4
(continued)
Chapter 5
206
Collecting Requirements
The second step in project scope management is often the most difficult: collecting
requirements. A major consequence of not defining requirements well is rework, which
can consume up to half of project costs, especially for software development projects. As
illustrated in Figure 5-2, it costs much more (up to 30 times more) to correct a software
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Design and
architecture
Implementation
Development phase
Integration
testing
Customer
beta test
Postproduct
release
Relative cost
100
500
1000
1500
3000
Figure 5-2  Relative cost to correct a software defect
Source: IBM Software Group, "Minimizing code defects to improve software quality and
lower development costs," Rational Software (October 2008).
Fortunately, several organizations have recognized this need and have developed
training and certification programs for business analysts.

The International Institute of Business Analysis (IIBA) issues both the
Certified Business Analysis Professional (CBAP) and Certification of
Competency in Business Analysis (CCBA) certifications. This organization
had over 29,000 members in 2018 and published the third edition of the
Guide to Business Analysis Body of Knowledge (BABOK Guide).

The International Requirements Engineering Board (IREB) provides
certification as a Certified Professional for Requirements Engineering (CPRE).
Over 37,000 people in 73 countries held this certification in 2018.

PMI began offering a new certification as a PMI Professional in Business
Analysis (PMI-PBA) in 2014.

Several colleges and universities are offering majors and minors in business or
data analytics at the undergraduate and graduate levels.
Project Scope Management
207
defect in later development phases than to fix it in the requirements phase. Everyone can
cite examples in all types of industries of how important it is to understand requirements
as early as possible. For example, if you are designing a house, it is much cheaper to
decide where windows and walls will be on paper or a computer screen than after the
entire house is framed. New processes and technologies are making it easier to define
and implement requirements, but it is still one of the most challenging aspects of project
scope management.
B e s t P r a c t i c e
Google continues to be among the most admired companies in the world, well-known
for being a great place to work and for being innovative in developing new products.
James Whittaker, former engineering director at Google, responsible for testing
Chrome, maps, and Google Web apps, wrote a book with co-authors Jason Arbon
and Jeff Carollo (also former Google employees) called How Google Tests Software.
Whittaker also worked for Microsoft and as a professor and is one of the best-known
names in testing software.
In How Google Tests Software, the authors explain that Google used to be like
other large companies: testing was not part of the mainstream, and people who did
it were underappreciated and overworked. It took Google a long time to develop the
people, processes, and technologies it uses today to develop software. A key part of
success at Google was changing the culture. Google has fewer dedicated testers than
most of its competitors have on a single product team. How is that possible? The
authors explain that quality rests on the shoulders of those writing the code. The
employees at Google do things the best, fastest way possible for them, knowing that
coders are responsible for the quality of their own work. They don't rely on testers to
ensure quality.
It is also interesting to note that Google does not believe in fads or buzzwords. In an
interview, InfoQ asked the authors how Google's approach fits into the wider Agile com-
munity. Their response: "Google doesn't try to be part of the Agile community. We don't
use the terminology of Scrums or bother with scrum masters and the like. We have
crafted our own process of moving fast. It's a very Agile process that doesn't get bogged
down with someone else's idea of what it means to be Agile. When you have to stop and
define what it means to be Agile and argue what flavor of Agile you are, you just stopped
being Agile."5
Part of the difficulty is that people often do not have a good process for collecting and
documenting project requirements.
There are several ways to collect requirements. Interviewing stakeholders one
on one is often very effective, although it can be expensive and time consuming.
Holding focus groups and facilitated workshops, and using group creativity and
Chapter 5
208
decision-making techniques to collect requirements are normally faster and less
expensive than one-on-one interviews. Questionnaires and surveys can be efficient
ways to collect requirements as long as key stakeholders provide honest and thorough
information. Observation can also be a good technique for collecting requirements,
especially for projects that involve improving work processes and procedures. For
software development projects, prototyping and document analysis are common
techniques for collecting requirements, as are context diagrams, which help to
clarify the interfaces and boundaries of a project or process. On agile software
development projects, the product owner creates the prioritized product backlog for
each sprint, as shown in Chapter 3. Benchmarking, or generating ideas by comparing
specific project practices or product characteristics to those of other projects or
products inside or outside the performing organization, can also be used to collect
requirements.
Even though there are many ways to collect requirements, people who work on
software projects in particular have considerable difficulty defining and managing
requirements. One study revealed some interesting statistics:

Eighty-eight percent of the software projects involved enhancing existing
products instead of creating new ones.

Eighty-six percent of respondents said that customer satisfaction was the
most important metric for measuring the success of development projects,
82 percent said that feedback from customers and partners was the main
source of product ideas and requirements, and 73 percent said that the
most important challenge for their teams was gaining a clear understanding
of what customers wanted, followed by documenting and managing
requirements.

Seventy-five percent of respondents were managing projects with at least
100 requirements; 20 percent were managing projects with over 1,000
requirements.

Seventy percent of respondents spent at least 10 percent of their time
managing changes to requirements; 30 percent spent more than 25 percent
of their time on such changes.

The majority of software development teams used a hybrid methodology, 26
percent used waterfall or modified waterfall techniques, and 19 percent used
agile techniques.

Eighty-three percent of software development teams still use Microsoft Office
applications such as Word and Excel as their main tools to communicate
requirements.

The respondents listed "requirements collaboration and management
software" and "requirements modeling and visualization" as the top two
software tools on their wish list, followed by test management and project
management.6
The project's size, complexity, importance, and other factors affect how much
effort is spent on collecting requirements. For example, a team working on a project to
upgrade the entire corporate accounting system for a multibillion-dollar company with
Project Scope Management
209
more than 50 locations should spend a fair amount of time collecting requirements. On
the other hand, a project to upgrade the hardware and software for a small accounting
firm with only five employees would need a much smaller effort. In any case, it is
important for a project team to decide how it will collect and manage requirements.
It is crucial to gather inputs from key stakeholders and align the scope with business
strategy, as described in Chapter 4.
Just as a project team can collect requirements in several ways, there are several
ways to document the requirements. Project teams should first review the project charter
because it includes high-level requirements for the project, and they should refer to the
scope and requirements management plans. They should also review the stakeholder
register and stakeholder management plan to ensure that all key stakeholders have a
say in determining requirements. The format for documenting stakeholder requirements
can range from a listing of all requirements on a single piece of paper to a room full
of notebooks. People who have worked on complex projects, such as building a new
airplane, know that the requirements documentation for a plane can weigh more than the
plane itself! Requirements documents are often generated by software and include text,
images, diagrams, videos, and other media. Requirements are often broken down into
different categories such as functional requirements, service requirements, performance
requirements, quality requirements, and training requirements.
In addition to preparing requirements documentation as an output of collecting
requirements, project teams often create a requirements traceability matrix. A
requirements traceability matrix (RTM) is a table that lists requirements, their various
attributes, and the status of the requirements to ensure that all are addressed. Table 5-1
provides an example of an RTM entry for the IT upgrade project described in the chapter's
opening case. An RTM can have many variations. For example, software requirements
are often documented in an RTM that cross-references each requirement with related
ones and lists specific tests to verify that they are met. Remember that the main purpose
of an RTM is to maintain the linkage from the source of each requirement through its
decomposition to implementation and validation. Search the Internet for more detailed
examples of an RTM.
Defining Scope
The next step in project scope management is to provide a detailed definition of the
work required for the project. Good scope definition is very important to project success
because it helps improve the accuracy of time, cost, and resource estimates, it defines a
Requirement
No.
Name
Category
Source
Status
R32
Laptop
memory
Hardware
Project charter and
corporate laptop
specifications
Complete. Laptops
ordered meet memory
requirement.
Table 5-1  Sample entry in a requirements traceability matrix
Chapter 5
210
baseline for performance measurement and project control, and it aids in communicating
clear work responsibilities. The main tools and techniques used in defining scope include
expert judgment, data analysis, decision making, interpersonal and team skills, and
product analysis. The main outputs of scope definition are the project scope statement
and project documents updates.
Table 5-2 shows the project charter for the IT upgrade project described in the
opening case. Notice how information from the project charter provides a basis for
further defining the project scope. The charter describes the high-level scope, time,
and cost goals for the project objectives and success criteria, a general approach to
accomplishing the project's goals, and the main roles and responsibilities of important
project stakeholders.
Although contents vary, project scope statements should include at least a product
scope description, product user acceptance criteria, and detailed information on all
project deliverables. It is also helpful to document other scope-related information,
such as the project boundaries, constraints, and assumptions. The project scope
Project Title: Information Technology (IT) Upgrade Project
Project Start Date: March 4
Projected Finish Date: ­December 4
Key Schedule Milestones:

Inventory update completed April 15

Hardware and software acquired August 1

Installation completed October 1

Testing completed November 15
Budget Information: Budgeted $1,000,000 for hardware and software costs and
$500,000 for labor costs.
Project Manager: Kim Nguyen, (310) 555-2784, knguyen@course.com
Project Objectives: Upgrade hardware and software for all employees (approximately
2,000) within nine months based on new corporate standards. See attached sheet
describing the new standards. Upgrades may affect servers as well as associated
network hardware and software.
Main Project Success Criteria: The hardware, software, and network upgrades must
meet all written specifications, be thoroughly tested, and be completed in nine months.
Employee work disruptions will be minimal.
Approach:

Update the IT inventory database to determine upgrade needs.

Develop detailed cost estimate for project and report to CIO.

Issue a request for quote to obtain hardware and software.

Use internal staff as much as possible for planning, analysis, and installation.
Table 5-2  Sample project charter
(continued)
Project Scope Management
211
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Name
Role
Responsibility
Walter Schmidt
CEO
Project sponsor, monitor project
Mike Zwack
CIO
Monitor project, provide staff
Kim Nguyen
Project Manager
Plan and execute project
Jeff Johnson
Director of IT Operations
Mentor Kim
Nancy Reynolds
VP, Human Resources
Provide staff, issue memo to all
employees about project
Steve McCann
Director of Purchasing
Assist in purchasing hardware and
software
Sign-off: (Signatures of all the above stakeholders)
Comments: (Handwritten or typed comments from above stakeholders, if
applicable)
"This project must be done within 10 months at the absolute latest."-Mike Zwack, CIO
"We are assuming that adequate staff will be available and committed to supporting this
project. Some work must be done after hours to avoid work disruptions, and overtime
will be provided."-Jeff Johnson and Kim Nguyen, IT department
Table 5-2  Sample project charter (continued)
statement should also reference supporting documents, such as product specifications
that will affect what products are created or purchased, or corporate policies, which
might affect how products or services are produced. Many IT projects require detailed
functional and design specifications for developing software, which also should be
referenced in the detailed scope statement.
As time progresses, the scope of a project should become more clear and specific.
For example, the project charter for the IT upgrade project in Table 5-2 includes a short
statement about the servers and other computers and software that the project may affect.
Table 5-3 provides an example of how the scope becomes progressively more detailed in
scope statements labeled Version 1 and Version 2.
Notice in Table 5-3 that the project scope statements often refer to related
documents, which can be product specifications, product brochures, or other plans. As
more information becomes available and decisions are made related to project scope,
Chapter 5
212
such as specific products that will be purchased or changes that have been approved, the
project team should update the project scope statement. The team might name different
iterations of the scope statement Version 1, Version 2, and so on. These updates may
also require changes to other project documents. For example, if the company must
purchase servers from a supplier it has never worked with before, the procurement
management plan should include information on working with that new supplier.
An up-to-date project scope statement is an important document for developing
and confirming a common understanding of the project scope. It describes in detail the
work to be accomplished on the project and is an important tool for ensuring customer
satisfaction and preventing scope creep, as described later in this chapter.
Recall from Chapter 1 the importance of addressing the triple constraint of project
management-meeting scope, time, and cost goals for a project. Time and cost goals are
normally straightforward. For example, the time goal for the IT upgrade project is nine
months, and the cost goal is $1.5 million. It is much more difficult to describe, agree upon,
and meet the scope goal of many projects.
Project Charter:
Upgrades may affect servers . . . (listed under Project Objectives)
Project Scope Statement, Version 1:
Servers: If additional servers are required to support this project, they must be
compatible with existing servers. If it is more economical to enhance existing servers,
a detailed description of enhancements must be submitted to the CIO for approval.
See current server specifications provided in Attachment 6. The CEO must approve
a detailed plan describing the servers and their location at least two weeks before
installation.
Project Scope Statement, Version 2:
Servers: This project will require purchasing 10 new servers to support Web, network,
database, application, and printing functions. Virtualization will be used to maximize
efficiency. Detailed descriptions of the servers are provided in a product brochure in
Attachment 8, along with a plan describing where they will be located.
Table 5-3  Further defining project scope
M e d i a S n a p s h o t
Inaccurate requirements gathering continues to be one of the main causes of project
failure. Organizations lack the resources and maturity in requirements management,
which comes at a price. The authors of the 2014 PMI in-depth report on requirements
management state that "For every dollar spent on projects and programs, 5.1 percent
is wasted due to poor requirements management. Put in more striking terms, this amounts
(continued)
Project Scope Management
213
to US$51 million wasted for every US$1billion spent. That's a lot of potential value falling
through the cracks in the project-driven world."7
The report provides the following survey results:

Forty-seven percent of organizations report that inaccurate requirements
management is the primary cause of projects not meeting their original goals
and business objectives.

Over half of organizations report not having adequate resources to perform
requirements management well.

Only 24 percent of organizations report doing well in recognizing and developing
skills needed for effective management of requirements.

Only 46 percent of organizations report using a formal process to ensure
unbiased requirements validation for projects.
The report concludes by suggesting that organizations need to develop people, processes,
and culture to improve requirements management.
Creating the Work Breakdown Structure
After collecting requirements and defining scope, the next step in project scope
management is to create a work breakdown structure. A work breakdown structure (WBS)
is a deliverable-oriented grouping of the work involved in a project that defines its total
scope. Because most projects involve many people and many different deliverables, it is
important to organize and divide the work into logical parts based on how the work will be
performed. The WBS is a foundation document in project management because it provides
the basis for planning and managing project schedules, costs, resources, and changes.
Because the WBS defines the total scope of the project, some project management
experts believe that work should not be done on a project if it is not included in the WBS.
Therefore, it is crucial to develop a complete WBS.
The project management plan, project documents, enterprise environmental
factors, and organizational process assets are the primary inputs for creating a WBS.
In addition to expert judgment, the main tool or technique is decomposition-that
is, subdividing project deliverables into smaller pieces. The outputs of the process of
creating the WBS are the scope baseline and project documents updates. The scope
baseline includes the approved project scope statement and its associated WBS and
WBS dictionary.
What does a WBS look like? A WBS is often depicted as a task-oriented tree of
activities, similar to an organizational chart. Many people like to create a WBS in chart
form first to help them visualize the whole project and all of its main parts. Figure 5-3
shows a WBS for an intranet project. The top box labeled Intranet represents the entire
project, and it is called Level 1 of the WBS. In this example, the main products to be
delivered are shown in Level 2, called website design, home page design, marketing
pages, and sales pages. Below them are Level 3 items, such as site map, graphic design,
and so on.
Chapter 5
214
Figure 5-4 shows a software product release project created by PMI. Notice that
instead of showing product deliverables in Level 2, it is organized around deliverables
for each project phase (product requirements, detail design, construct, and integration
and test) as well as another Level 2 item for project management. Table 5-4 shows
this same WBS in a tabular or list format. This level numbering is based on the Project
Management Institute's Practice Standard for Work Breakdown Structures, Second
Edition (2006).
Many documents, such as contracts, use the tabular format, but the numbering
scheme may vary. Project management software also uses the tabular format. The
WBS provides the basis for creating the activities that are entered into the Task Name
column in Microsoft Project, and the hierarchy or level of tasks is shown by indenting
Figure 5-4  Sample intranet WBS organized by phase in chart and tabular form
Software Product
Release 5.0
Project
Management
Planning
Meetings
Administration
Software
User
Documentation
Training Program
Materials
Software
User
Documentation
Training Program
Materials
Software
User
Documentation
Training Program
Materials
Software
User
Documentation
Training Program
Materials
Product
Requirements
Detail Design
Construct
Integration
and Test
The WBS is illustrative only. It is not intended to represent the full project scope of any
speciﬁc project, nor to imply that this is the only way to organize a WBS on this type of project.
Source: PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition. Project Management Institute, Inc. (2017). Copyright and
all rights reserved. Material from this publication has been reproduced with permission of PMI.
Figure 5-3  Sample intranet WBS organized by product
Website design
Home page design
Marketing pages
Sales pages
Intranet
Site map
Programs
Graphic design
Text
Hyperlinks
Images
Text
Hyperlinks
Images
Text
Hyperlinks
Images
WBS Level 1
WBS Level 2
WBS Level 3
Project Scope Management
215
and numbering tasks within the software. Be sure to check with your organization to see
which numbering scheme it prefers to use for WBSs. To avoid confusion, it is important to
decide on a numbering scheme and then use it when referring to WBS items.
Also determine how you will name WBS items. Some organizations use only nouns
to focus on describing deliverables, as PMI recommends. For example, instead of using
the words "define requirements" on a WBS, use "requirements definition." Activities on
a schedule below requirements definition would include verb phrases, as discussed in
Chapter 6, Project Schedule Management. Remember that the main purpose of the WBS
is to define all of the work required to complete a project, so focus on that while following
your organization's structural guidelines.
A work package is a task at the lowest level of the WBS. A work package also
represents the level of work that the project manager monitors and controls. You can
think of work packages in terms of accountability and reporting. If a project has a
relatively short time frame and requires weekly progress reports, a work package might
represent work completed in one week or less. If a project has a very long time frame and
requires quarterly progress reports, a work package might represent work completed in
one month or more. A work package might also be the procurement of a specific product
or products, such as an item or items purchased from an outside source. A work package
should be defined at the proper level so the project manager can clearly establish an
estimate of the effort needed to complete it, estimate the cost of all required resources,
and evaluate the quality of the results when the work package is finished.
1.0
Software Product Release 5.0

1.1
Project Management

1.1.1
Planning

1.1.2
Meetings

1.1.3
Administration

1.2
Product Requirements

1.2.1
Software

1.2.2
User Documentation

1.2.3
Training Program Materials

1.3
Detail Design

1.3.1
Software

1.3.2
User Documentation

1.3.3
Training Program Materials

1.4
Construct

1.4.1
Software

1.4.2
User Documentation

1.4.3
Training Program Materials

1.5
Integration and Test

1.5.1
Software

1.5.2
User Documentation

1.5.3
Training Program Materials
Table 5-4  Tabular form of WBS
Chapter 5
216
When using project management software, estimates of work time should be entered
only at the work package level. The rest of the WBS items are just groupings or summary
tasks for the work packages. The software automatically calculates duration estimates
for various WBS levels based on data entered for each work package and the WBS
hierarchy.
Figure 5-5 shows a template file from Microsoft Project 2016 for a Software
Development project. The Level 2 WBS categories include scope, analysis/software
requirements, design, development, testing training, documentation, pilot, deployment,
and post implementation review. Activities are shown for the analysis/software
requirements. Notice that the WBS is the basis for creating the Gantt chart, as described
in more detail in Chapter 6, Project Schedule Management. You will learn more about
Gantt charts in Chapter 6, Project schedule management.
The example WBSs shown here are simplified so that they are somewhat easy to
understand and construct. Nevertheless, it is very difficult to create a good WBS. To
create a good WBS, you must understand the project and its scope and incorporate the
needs and knowledge of the stakeholders. The project manager and the project team must
decide as a group how to organize the work and how to include many levels in the WBS.
While many project managers have found that they should focus on doing the top
levels well before becoming bogged down in more detailed levels, it is also true that more
accurate estimates of scope, time, and cost are obtained when the project is defined
appropriately and in sufficient detail. Operating at too high a level increases project risk.
The act of defining the WBS is meant to offset that risk by considering the project's details
in advance of their execution.
Figure 5-5  Software development project template from Microsoft Project 2016
Project Scope Management
217
Many people confuse tasks on a WBS with specifications. Tasks on a WBS represent
work that needs to be done to complete the project. For example, if you are creating a
WBS to redesign a kitchen, you might have Level 2 categories called design, purchasing,
flooring, walls, cabinets, and appliances. Under flooring, you might have tasks to
remove the old flooring, install the new flooring, and install the trim. You would not
have tasks like "12 ft. by 14 ft. of light oak" or "flooring must be durable"; these are
specifications.
Another concern when creating a WBS is how to organize it to provide the basis for
the project schedule. You should focus on what work needs to be done and how it will be
done, not when it will be done. In other words, the tasks do not have to be developed as
a sequential list of steps. If you want some time-based flow for the work, you can create
a WBS using the project management process groups of initiating, planning, executing,
monitoring and controlling, and closing as Level 2 in the WBS. By doing this, not only
does the project team follow good project management practice, the WBS tasks can also
be mapped more easily against time. For example, Figure 5-6 shows a WBS and Gantt
chart for a website project, organized by the five project management process groups.
Activities under initiating include selecting a project manager, forming the project
team, and developing the project charter. Activities under planning include developing
a scope statement, creating a WBS, and developing and refining other plans, which
would be broken down in more detail for a real project. Concept, website design, website
development, and rollout are WBS Level 3 items under executing. The executing tasks
vary the most from project to project, but many of the activities under the other project
management process groups would be similar for all projects. If you do not use the
project management process groups in the WBS, you can have a Level 2 category called
"project management" to make sure you account for all activities related to managing the
project, as was done in Figure 5-4 from PMI. Remember that all work should be included
in the WBS, including project management.
WBS
Schedule
Figure 5-6  Website project Gantt chart organized by project management process groups
Chapter 5
218
Some project teams like to list every deliverable they need to produce and then use
those as the basis for creating all or part of their WBS. In Chapter 3, JWD Consulting used
the project management process groups for the Level 2 items in its WBS for the project
management intranet site project. Then in breaking down the executing section, the
project team focused on the product deliverables it had to produce. Table 5-5 shows the
categories the team used for that part of the WBS. Recall that the scope statement should
list and describe all of the deliverables required for the project. It is very important to
ensure consistency between the project charter, scope statement, WBS, and Gantt chart
to define the scope of the project accurately.
It is also very important to involve the entire project team and the customer in
creating and reviewing the WBS. People who will do the work should help to plan the
work by creating the WBS. Having group meetings to develop a WBS helps everyone
understand what work must be done for the entire project and how it should be done,
given the people involved. It also helps to identify where coordination between different
work packages will be required.
Approaches to Developing Work Breakdown Structures
You can use several approaches to develop a WBS:

Using guidelines

The analogy approach

The top-down approach

The bottom-up approach

The mind-mapping approach
3.0
Executing

3.1
Survey

3.2
User inputs

3.3
Intranet site content

3.3.1
Templates and tools

3.3.2
Articles

3.3.3
Links

3.3.4
Ask the Expert

3.3.5
User Requests feature
3.4
Intranet site design
3.5
Intranet site construction
3.6
Intranet site testing
3.7
Intranet site roll-out
3.8
Site rollout
3.9
Intranet site roll-out
Table 5-5  Executing tasks for JWD Consulting's WBS
Project Scope Management
219
Using Guidelines
If guidelines exist for developing a WBS, it is very important to follow them. Some
organizations-the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD), for example-prescribe the form
and content for WBSs for particular projects. Many DOD projects require contractors to
prepare their proposals based on the DOD-provided WBS. These proposals must include
cost estimates for each task in the WBS at a detailed and summary level. The cost for the
entire project must be calculated by summing the costs of all of the lower-level WBS tasks.
When DOD personnel evaluate cost proposals, they must compare the contractors' costs
with the DOD's estimates. A large variation in costs for a certain WBS task often indicates
confusion as to what work must be done.
Consider a large automation project for the U.S. Air Force. In the mid-1980s, the Air
Force developed a request for proposals for the Local On-Line Network System (LONS)
to automate 15 Air Force Systems Command bases. This $250 million project involved
providing the hardware and developing software for sharing documents such as contracts,
specifications, and requests for proposals. The Air Force proposal guidelines included a
WBS that contractors were required to follow in preparing their cost proposals. Level 2
WBS items included hardware, software development, training, and project management.
The hardware item was composed of several Level 3 items, such as servers, workstations,
printers, and network hardware. Air Force personnel reviewed the contractors' cost
proposals against their internal cost estimate, which was also based on this WBS. Having
a prescribed WBS helped contractors to prepare their cost proposals and helped the Air
Force to evaluate them.
Many organizations provide guidelines and templates for developing WBSs, as
well as examples of WBSs from past projects. Microsoft Project 2016 comes with
several templates, and more are available on Microsoft's website and other sites. At the
request of many of its members, PMI developed a WBS Practice Standard to provide
guidance for developing and applying the WBS to project management. The Practice
Standard includes sample WBSs for a wide variety of projects in various industries,
including projects for Web design, telecom, service industry outsourcing, and software
implementation.
Project managers and their teams should review appropriate information to develop
their unique project WBSs more efficiently. For example, Kim Nguyen and key team
members from the opening case should review their company's WBS guidelines, templates,
and other related information before and during the team meetings to create their WBS.
The Analogy Approach
Another method for constructing a WBS is the analogy approach. In the analogy
approach, you use a similar project's WBS as a starting point. For example, Kim Nguyen
from the opening case might learn that one of her organization's suppliers did a similar
IT upgrade project last year. She could ask them to share their WBS for that project to
provide a starting point for her own project.
McDonnell Aircraft Company, now part of Boeing, provides an example of using
an analogy approach when creating WBSs. McDonnell Aircraft Company designed and
manufactured several different fighter aircraft. When creating a WBS for a new aircraft
Chapter 5
220
design, it started by using 74 predefined subsystems for building fighter aircraft based
on past experience. There was a Level 2 WBS item for the airframe that was composed
of Level 3 items such as a forward fuselage, center fuselage, aft fuselage, and wings. This
generic, product-oriented WBS provided a starting point for defining the scope of new
aircraft projects and developing cost estimates for new aircraft designs.
Some organizations keep a repository of WBSs and other project documentation
on file to assist people working on projects. Project 2016 and many other software
tools include sample files to assist users in creating a WBS and Gantt chart. Viewing
examples of WBSs from similar projects allows you to understand different ways to
create a WBS.
The Top-Down and Bottom-Up Approaches
Two other methods of creating WBSs are the top-down and bottom-up approaches.
Most project managers consider the top-down approach of WBS construction to be
conventional.
To use the top-down approach, start with the largest items of the project and break
them into subordinate items. This process involves refining the work into greater and
greater levels of detail. After finishing the process, all resources should be assigned at the
work package level. The top-down approach is best suited to project managers who have
vast technical insight and a big-picture perspective.
In the bottom-up approach, team members first identify as many specific tasks
related to the project as possible. They then aggregate the specific tasks and organize
them into summary activities, or higher levels in the WBS. For example, a group of
people might be responsible for creating a WBS to develop an e-commerce application.
Instead of looking for guidelines on how to create a WBS or viewing WBSs from similar
projects, they could begin by listing detailed tasks they think they would need to
perform in order to create the application. After listing these detailed tasks, they
would group the tasks into categories. Then they would group these categories into
higher-level categories. Some people have found that writing all possible tasks as
notes and then placing them on a wall helps the team see all the work required for the
project and develop logical groupings for performing the work. For example, a business
analyst on the project team might know that it had to define user requirements and
content requirements for the e-commerce application. These tasks might be part of
the requirements documents the team would have to create as one of the project
deliverables. A hardware specialist might know that the team had to define system
requirements and server requirements, which would also be part of a requirements
document. As a group, they might decide to put all four of these tasks under a higher-
level item called "requirements definition" that would result in the delivery of a
requirements document. Later, they might realize that requirements definition should
fall under a broader category of concept design for the e-commerce application, along
with other groups of tasks related to the concept design. The bottom-up approach
can be very time consuming, but it can also be a very effective way to create a WBS.
Project managers often use the bottom-up approach for projects that represent
entirely new systems or approaches to doing a job, or to help create buy-in and
synergy with a project team.
Project Scope Management
221
Mind Mapping
Some project managers like to use mind mapping to help develop WBSs. As described in
Chapter 4 during the discussion of SWOT analysis, mind mapping is a technique that uses
branches radiating from a core idea to structure thoughts and ideas. Instead of writing
down tasks in a list or immediately trying to create a structure for tasks, mind mapping
allows people to write and even draw pictures of ideas in a nonlinear format. This more
visual, less structured approach to defining and then grouping tasks can unlock creativity
among individuals and increase participation and morale among teams.8
Figure 5-7 shows a diagram created with MatchWare's MindView 6.0 software that
uses mind mapping to create a WBS for the IT upgrade project from the opening case. The
rectangle near the center represents the entire project. Each of the four main branches
radiating from the center represents the main tasks or Level 2 items for the WBS. Different
people at the meeting who are creating this mind map might have different roles in the
project, which could help in deciding the tasks and WBS structure. For example, Kim would
want to focus on all of the project management tasks, and she might also know that they will
be tracked in a separate budget category. People who are familiar with acquiring or installing
hardware and software might focus on that work, and so on. The team would continue to
add branches and items until they exhausted ideas for what work needs to be performed.
After discovering WBS items and their structure using the mind-mapping technique, you
could then translate the information into chart or tabular form, as described earlier. A feature
of MatchWare's MindView 6.0 software is that you can click a single icon to convert a mind
map into a Gantt chart. The mind map provides the task list based on the WBS. MindView
also lets you enter information about tasks, such as dependencies and durations, to generate a
complete Gantt chart. You can also export your mind map into Microsoft Project. The WBS is
Figure 5-7  Sample mind-mapping technique for creating a WBS
Source: MatchWare MindView 6.0
Chapter 5
222
entered in the Task List column, and the structure is created automatically based on the mind
map. Figure 5-8 shows the resulting Gantt chart for the IT upgrade project in MindView 6.0.
Mind mapping can be used for developing WBSs using the top-down or bottom-up
approach. For example, you could conduct mind mapping for an entire project by listing the
project in the center of a document, adding the main categories on branches radiating from
the center, and then adding branches for appropriate subcategories. You could also develop
a separate mind-mapping diagram for each deliverable and then merge them to create one
large diagram for the entire project. You can also add items anywhere on a mind-mapping
document without following a strict top-down or bottom-up approach. After the mind-
mapping documents are complete, you can convert them into a chart or tabular WBS form.
Figure 5-8  Gantt chart with WBS generated from a mind map
A d v i c e f o r Y o u n g P r o f e s s i o n a l s
As mentioned in this chapter, it is very difficult to create a good WBS. Try to attend
meetings in your organization where teams work together to create a WBS. If that's not
possible, ask to see WBSs for projects that have been completed or are in process where
you work. You can also do your own research to find examples of different WBSs. There
are many template files available for Microsoft Project and other project management
software. Don't be afraid to ask questions. There is no one way to organize the work that
needs to be done on a project. Remember to not leave anything essential out of a WBS,
and do not include anything that is superfluous.
Source: MatchWare MindView 6.0
Project Scope Management
223
The WBS Dictionary
Many of the items listed on the sample WBSs are rather vague. What exactly does
"Database update" mean, for example? The person responsible for this task might think
that it does not need to be broken down any further, which could be fine. However, the
task should be described in more detail so everyone has the same understanding of what
it involves. What if someone else has to perform the task? What would you tell that team
member to do? What will it cost to complete the task? More detailed information is
needed to answer these and other questions.
A WBS dictionary is a document that provides detailed information about each WBS
item. The term dictionary should not be confused with defining terms or acronyms in this
case; such definitions belong in a glossary that would be included elsewhere in the project
documentation. Instead, the WBS dictionary is a definition of the work involved in the
task-a clarification that makes the summary description in the WBS easier to understand
in terms of the approach taken to complete the work.
The format of the WBS dictionary can vary based on project needs. It might be
appropriate to have a short paragraph describing each work package. For a more
complex project, an entire page or more might be needed for each of the work package
descriptions. Some projects might require that each WBS item describe the responsible
organization, resource requirements, estimated costs, dependencies with other activities,
and other information. Project teams often review WBS dictionary entries from similar
tasks to get a better idea of how to create their entries.
In the IT upgrade project described in the opening case, Kim should work with her
team and sponsor to determine the level of detail needed in the WBS dictionary. They
should also decide where this information will be entered and how it will be updated. Kim
and her team decided to enter all of the WBS dictionary information into their enterprise
project management system, following departmental guidelines. Table 5-6 is an example of
one entry.
The approved project scope statement and its associated WBS and WBS dictionary
form the scope baseline. Performance in meeting project scope goals is based on this
scope baseline.
WBS Dictionary Entry March 20
Project Title: Information Technology (IT) Upgrade Project
WBS Item Number: 2.2
WBS Item Name: Database Update
Description: The IT department maintains an online database of hardware and software
on the corporate intranet. We need to make sure that we know exactly what hardware
and software employees are currently using and if they have any unique needs before
we decide what to order for the upgrade. This task will involve reviewing information
from the current database, producing reports that list each department's employees
Table 5-6  Sample WBS dictionary entry
(continued)
Chapter 5
224
Advice for Creating a WBS and a WBS Dictionary
As stated previously, creating a good WBS is no easy task and usually requires several
iterations. Often, it is best to use a combination of approaches to create a project's WBS.
Some basic principles, however, apply to creating any good WBS and its WBS dictionary.

A unit of work should appear in only one place in the WBS.

The work content of a WBS item is the sum of the WBS items below it.

A WBS item is the responsibility of only one person, even though many
people might be working on it.

The WBS must be consistent with the way work actually will be performed; it
should serve the project team first, and serve other purposes only if practical.

Project team members should be involved in developing the WBS to ensure
consistency and buy-in.

Each WBS item must be documented in a WBS dictionary to ensure accurate
understanding of the scope of work included and not included in that item.

The WBS must be a flexible tool to accommodate inevitable changes while
properly maintaining control of the work content in the project according to
the scope statement.9
Validating Scope
It is difficult to create a good project scope statement and WBS for a project. It is even
more difficult, especially on IT projects, to verify the project scope and minimize scope
changes. Some project teams know from the start that the scope is very unclear and
that they must work closely with the project customer to design and produce various
deliverables. In this case, the project team must develop a process for scope validation
that meets unique project needs. Careful procedures must be developed to ensure that
customers are getting what they want and that the project team has enough time and
money to produce the desired products and services.
and location, and updating the data after performing the physical inventory and receiv-
ing inputs from department managers. Our project sponsor will send a notice to all
department managers to communicate the importance of this project and this particu-
lar task. In addition to general hardware and software upgrades, the project sponsors
will ask the department managers to provide information for any unique requirements
they might have that could affect the upgrades. This task also includes updating the
inventory data for network hardware and software. After updating the inventory data-
base, we will send an e-mail to each department manager to verify the information and
make changes online as needed. Department managers will be responsible for ensuring
that their people are available and cooperative during the physical inventory. Complet-
ing this task is dependent on WBS Item Number 2.1, Physical Inventory, and must pre-
cede WBS Item Number 3.0, Hardware and Software Acquisition.
Table 5-6  Sample WBS dictionary entry (continued)
Project Scope Management
225
Even when the project scope is fairly well defined, many IT projects suffer from scope
creep-the tendency for project scope to keep getting bigger and bigger. There are many
horror stories about IT projects failing due to problems such as scope creep, including
a few classic examples in the following What Went Wrong? feature. For this reason, it is
very important to verify the project scope with users throughout the life of the project and
develop a process for controlling scope changes.
Scope creep can also be a good thing, if managed well. Later in this chapter, you can
see how Northwest Airlines encouraged scope changes on its ResNet project and managed
them well.
W h a t W e n t W r o n g ?
A project scope that is too broad and grandiose can cause severe problems. Scope creep
and an overemphasis on technology for technology's sake resulted in the bankruptcy of a
large pharmaceutical firm, Texas-based FoxMeyer Drug. In 1994, the CIO was pushing for
a $65 million system to manage the company's critical operations. He did not believe in
keeping things simple, however. The company spent nearly $10 million on state-of-the-
art hardware and software and contracted the management of the project to a prestigious
(and expensive) consulting firm. The project included building an $18 million robotic
warehouse, which looked like something out of a science fiction movie, according to
insiders. The scope of the project kept getting bigger and more impractical. The elaborate
warehouse was not ready on time, and the new system generated erroneous orders that
cost FoxMeyer Drug more than $15 million in unrecovered excess shipments. In July
1996, the company took a $34 million charge for its fourth fiscal quarter, and by August
of that year, FoxMeyer Drug filed for bankruptcy.10
Another classic example of scope creep comes from McDonald's Restaurants. In
2001, the fast-food chain initiated a project to create an intranet that would connect
its headquarters with all of its restaurants and provide detailed operational information
in real time. For example, headquarters would know if sales were slowing or if the grill
temperature was correct in every single store-all 30,000 of them in more than 120
countries. McDonald's would not divulge detailed information, but they admitted that the
project was too large in scale and scope. After spending $170 million on consultants and
initial implementation planning, McDonald's realized that the project was too much to
handle and terminated it.11
Another major scope problem on IT projects is a lack of user involvement. A prime
example occurred in the late 1980s at Northrop Grumman, which specializes in defense
electronics, IT, advanced aircraft, shipbuilding, and space technology. An IT project team
there became convinced that it should automate the review and approval process of gov-
ernment proposals. The team implemented a powerful workflow system to manage the
whole process. Unfortunately, the end users of the system were aerospace engineers who
preferred to work in a more casual, ad hoc fashion. They dubbed the system "Naziware"
and refused to use it. This example illustrates an IT project that wasted millions of dol-
lars developing a system that was not in touch with the way end users did their work.12
(continued)
Chapter 5
226
Scope validation involves formal acceptance of the completed project deliverables.
This acceptance is often achieved by a customer inspection and then sign-off on key
deliverables. To receive formal acceptance of the project scope, the project team must
develop clear documentation of the project's products and procedures to evaluate whether
they were completed correctly and satisfactorily. Recall from Chapter 4 that configuration
management specialists identify and document the functional and physical characteristics
of the project's products, record and report the changes, and audit the products to verify
conformance to requirements. To minimize scope changes, it is crucial to do a good job of
configuration management and validating project scope.
The project management plan, project documents, verified deliverables, and work
performance data are the main inputs for scope validation. The main tools for performing
scope validation are inspection and decision-making techniques. The customer, sponsor,
or user inspects the work after it is delivered and decides if it meets requirements.
The main outputs of scope validation are accepted deliverables, change requests, work
performance information, and project documents updates. For example, suppose that
Kim's team members deliver upgraded computers to users as part of the IT upgrade
project. Several users might complain because the computers did not include special
keyboards they need for medical reasons. Appropriate people would review this change
request and take appropriate corrective action, such as getting sponsor approval for
purchasing the special keyboards.
Failing to follow good project management processes and use off-the-shelf software
also results in scope problems. 21st Century Insurance Group in Woodland Hills,
California, paid Computer Sciences Corporation $100 million to develop a system
for managing business applications, including managing insurance policies, billing,
claims, and customer service. After five years, the system was still in development
and supported less than 2 percent of the company's business. Joshua Greenbaum, an
analyst at Enterprise Applications Consulting, called the project a "huge disaster" and
questioned the insurance company's ability "to manage a process that is pretty well
known these days. . . . I'm surprised that there wasn't some way to build what they
needed using off-the-shelf components and lower their risk."13
G l o b a l I s s u e s
Many countries have had difficulties controlling the scope of large projects, especially
those that involve advanced technologies and many different users. For example, the
state government of Victoria, Australia, introduced a public transportation smart card,
called myki, in 2010. Public Transport Victoria's description of the card included the fol-
lowing information: "Many cities around the world have public transport smart cards.
myki has been designed to fit our State's unique needs. myki users enjoy an integrated
ticketing system that works across the state on trains, trams and buses."14
(continued)
Project Scope Management
227
Controlling Scope
As you learned in Chapter 4 when you studied integrated change control, change is
inevitable on projects, especially changes to the scope of IT projects. Scope control
involves managing changes to the project scope while keeping project goals and business
strategy in mind. Users often are not sure how they want screens to look or what
functionality they will need to improve business performance. Developers are not exactly
sure how to interpret user requirements, and they also have to deal with constantly
changing technologies.
The goal of scope control is to influence the factors that cause scope changes, to
ensure that changes are processed according to procedures developed as part of integrated
change control, and to manage changes when they occur. You cannot do a good job of
controlling scope if you do not first do a good job of collecting requirements, defining
scope, and validating scope. How can you prevent scope creep when you have not agreed
on the work to be performed and your sponsor has not validated that the proposed work
is acceptable? You also need to develop a process for soliciting and monitoring changes to
project scope. Stakeholders should be encouraged to suggest changes that will benefit the
overall project and discouraged from suggesting unnecessary changes.
The project management plan, project documents, work performance data, and
organizational process assets are the main inputs to scope control. An important tool
for performing scope control is data analysis, including variance analysis. Variance is
Unfortunately, there were many problems in developing and implementing the
smart cards. The $1.35 billion system became valid on all forms of Melbourne public
transportation in July 2010, three years and five months after it was meant to replace
the Metcard. Users' initial reactions to the myki smart card were mixed, with several
reports of myki readers not working on trams. Many skeptics said they would wait until
problems were fixed before trying the new system.15 Many articles described problems
with the myki card, revealing obvious difficulty in validating the scope of this high-
visibility project. The Public Transport Users Association (PTUA) compiled a long list of
problems with the new card and suggested that people stick to using the old card for a
while. Clearly, the new system did not meet user requirements and had major flaws. In
January 2012, over 18 months after the myki rollout, 70 percent of users still used the
old Metcard. The government decided to keep myki in June 2011 after estimating that
it would cost taxpayers more than $1 billion to scrap the troubled system. The Metcard
was planned to be phased out for good by the end of 2012. PTUA president Daniel
Bowen was not certain that the transition would go smoothly. "To a certain extent it
makes sense to bring people across (to myki) because you can't have two systems
running at the same time forever. . . . Once you get the majority of people using myki
though, they'd better make sure it's humming, otherwise there could be chaos."16 Myki
continued to make headlines in 2015, but not in a good way. "Two years after myki
became the only ticket in town, frustrated commuters say the system is still riddled
with issues."17
Chapter 5
228
the difference between planned and actual performance. For example, if a supplier was
supposed to deliver five special keyboards and you received only four, the variance would
be one keyboard. The outputs of scope control include work performance information,
change requests, project management plan updates, and project documents updates.
Table 1-2 in Chapter 1 lists the top 10 factors that help IT projects succeed. Four
of these ten factors are related to scope validation and control: executive sponsorship,
user involvement, optimization, and clear business objectives. To avoid project failures,
therefore, it is crucial for IT project managers and their teams to improve user input and
executive support and reduce incomplete and changing requirements.
The following sections provide more suggestions for improving scope management on
IT projects.
Suggestions for Improving User Input
Lack of user input leads to problems with managing scope creep and controlling change.
How can you manage this important issue? The following suggestions can help a project
team improve user input:

Develop a good project selection process for IT projects. Insist that all
projects have a sponsor from the user organization. The sponsor should not
work in the IT department, nor should the sponsor be the project manager.
Project information, including the project charter, project management plan,
project scope statement, WBS, and WBS dictionary, should be easily available
in the organization. Making basic project information available will help avoid
duplication of effort and ensure that the most important projects are the ones
on which people are working.

Have users on the project team. Some organizations require project managers
to come from the business area of the project instead of the IT group. Some
organizations assign co-project managers to IT projects, one from IT and one
from the main business group. Users should be assigned full time to large IT
projects and part-time to smaller projects. A key success factor in Northwest
Airlines' ResNet project was training reservation agents-the users-how
to write programming code for their new reservation system. (See the
Companion website for this text to read the entire case study for the ResNet
project.) Because the sales agents had intimate knowledge of the business,
they provided excellent input and actually created most of the software.

Have regular meetings with defined agendas. The idea of meeting regularly
sounds obvious, but many IT projects fail because the project team members
do not have regular interaction with users. They assume that they understand
what users need without getting direct feedback. To encourage this
interaction, users should sign off on key deliverables presented at meetings.

Deliver something to project users and sponsors on a regular basis. If the
delivered product is hardware or software, make sure it works first.

Do not promise to deliver what the team cannot deliver in a particular time
frame. Make sure the project schedule allows enough time to produce the
deliverables.
Project Scope Management
229

Locate users with the developers. People often get to know each other better
by being in close proximity. If the users cannot be physically moved to be
near developers during the entire project, they should set aside certain days
to work in the same location.
Suggestions for Reducing Incomplete and Changing Requirements
Some requirement changes are expected on IT projects, but many projects have too many
changes to their requirements, especially during later stages of the project life cycle when
it is more difficult to implement changes. The following suggestions can help improve the
requirements process:

Develop and follow a requirements management process that includes
procedures for determining initial requirements.

Employ techniques such as prototyping, use case modeling, and Joint
Application Design to understand user requirements thoroughly. Prototyping
involves developing a working replica of the system or some aspect of the
system. These working replicas may be throwaways or an incremental
component of the deliverable system. Prototyping is an effective tool for
gaining an understanding of requirements, determining the feasibility of
requirements, and resolving user interface uncertainties. Use case modeling
is a process for identifying and modeling business events, who initiated
them, and how the system should respond to them. It is an effective tool for
understanding requirements of information systems. Joint Application Design
(JAD) uses highly organized and intensive workshops to bring together project
stakeholders-the sponsor, users, business analysts, programmers, and so
on-to jointly define and design information systems. These techniques also
help users become more active in defining system requirements. Consult a
systems analysis and design text for details on these techniques.

Put all requirements in writing and keep them current and readily available.
Several tools are available to automate this function. For example, a type
of software called a requirements management tool aids in capturing and
maintaining requirements information, provides immediate access to the
information, and assists in establishing necessary relationships between
requirements and information created by other tools.

Create a requirements management database for documenting and controlling
requirements. Computer Aided Software Engineering (CASE) tools or other
technologies can assist in maintaining a repository for project data. A CASE
tool's database can also be used to document and control requirements.

Provide adequate testing to verify that the project's products perform as
expected. Conduct testing throughout the project life cycle. Chapter 8,
Project Quality Management, includes more information on testing.

Use a process for reviewing requested requirements changes from a systems
perspective. For example, ensure that project scope changes include
associated cost and schedule changes. Require approval via signatures of
appropriate stakeholders. It is crucial for the project manager to lead the team
Chapter 5
230
in its focus on achieving approved scope goals and not getting sidetracked
into doing additional work. For example, in his book Alpha Project Managers,
Andy Crowe tried to uncover what the best or "alpha" project managers do
differently from other project managers. One of these alpha project managers
explained how he learned an important lesson about scope control:
Toward the end of some projects I've worked on, the managers made
their teams work these really long hours. After the second or third time
this happened, I just assumed that this was the way things worked. Then
I got to work with a manager who planned everything out really well and
ran the team at a good pace the whole time, and we kept on schedule.
When the customer found out that things were on schedule, he kept try-
ing to increase the scope, but we had a good manager this time, and she
wouldn't let him do it without adjusting the baselines. That was the first
time I was on a project that finished everything on time and on budget,
and I was amazed at how easy she made it look.18

Emphasize completion dates. For example, a project manager at Farmland
Industries, Inc. in Kansas City, Missouri, kept her 15-month, $7 million
integrated supply-chain project on track by setting the project deadline. She
said, "May 1 was the drop-dead date, and everything else was backed into it.
Users would come to us and say they wanted something, and we'd ask them
what they wanted to give up to get it. Sticking to the date is how we managed
scope creep."19

Allocate resources specifically for handling change requests. For example,
Peeter Kivestu and his ResNet team at Northwest Airlines knew that users
would request enhancements to the reservations system they were developing.
They provided a special function key on the ResNet screen for users to
submit their requests, and the project included three full-time programmers
to handle these requests. Users made over 11,000 enhancement requests.
The managers who sponsored the four main software applications had to
prioritize the software enhancement requests and decide as a group what
changes to approve. The three programmers then implemented as many items
as they could, in priority order, given the time they had. Although they only
implemented 38 percent of the requested enhancements, they were the most
important ones, and the users were very satisfied with the system and process.
Using Software to Assist in Project
Scope Management
Project managers and their teams can use several types of software to assist in project
scope management. As shown in several of the figures and tables in this chapter, you
can use word-processing software to create scope-related documents, and most people
use spreadsheet or presentation software to develop various charts, graphs, and matrixes
related to scope management. Mind-mapping software can be useful in developing a WBS.
Project Scope Management
231
Project stakeholders also transmit project scope management information using various
types of communication software such as e-mail and assorted web-based applications.
Project management software helps you develop a WBS, which serves as a basis for
creating Gantt charts, assigning resources, allocating costs, and performing other tasks.
You can also use the templates that come with various project management software
products to help you create a WBS for your project.
You can also use many types of specialized software to assist in project scope
management. Many IT projects use special software for requirements management,
prototyping, modeling, and other scope-related work. Because scope is such a crucial part
of project management, many software products are available to assist in managing project
scope. For example, Gartner estimates that the market for requirements definition and
management tools was $280 million in 2014 and growing over 3 percent annually. New
tools focus on improving collaboration and speed to better address mass market needs.20
Considerations for Agile/Adaptive Environments
The PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition provides the following information for project scope
management:
In projects with evolving requirements, high risk, or significant uncertainty, the scope is
often not understood at the beginning of the project or it evolves during the project. Agile
methods deliberately spend less time trying to define and agree on scope in the early stage
of the project and spend more time establishing the process for its ongoing discovery and
refinement. Many environments with emerging requirements find that there is often a gap
between the real business requirements and the business requirements that were originally
stated. Therefore, agile methods purposefully build and review prototypes and release
versions in order to refine the requirements. As a result, scope is defined and redefined
throughout the project. In agile approaches, the requirements constitute the backlog.21
As discussed in Chapter 2, stakeholders define and approve the detailed scope before
the start of an iteration with an adaptive or agile product life cycle, producing a usable
product at the end of each iteration. Does this mean that scope does not change for other
product life cycles? As described in this chapter, the high-level requirements should
always be defined early (in the project charter and initial scope statement), but the
detailed scope develops over time. For example, in a large, traditional project like building
a house, the owners set the high-level requirements (number of square feet, location, basic
blueprint, etc.), but detailed requirements are defined later (which particular flooring,
what model number for appliances, etc.). Also, remember a key difference between an
agile approach and others is that it provides several usable products during the project,
while other approaches only deliver the final product at the end of the project.
You can still use project management software for agile projects. For example, Figure 5-9
shows a screenshot of a Microsoft Project 2016 template called "Agile Project Management."
It includes links and brief instructions for creating sprints, the product backlog, and the
sprint backlog. You can also create other charts, as shown in the figure.
Project scope management is very important, especially on IT projects. After selecting
projects, organizations must plan scope management, collect the requirements and define
Chapter 5
232
the scope of the work, break down the work into manageable pieces, validate the scope
with project stakeholders, and manage changes to project scope. Using the basic project
management concepts, tools, and techniques discussed in this chapter can help you
manage project scope successfully.
Figure 5-9  Using Microsoft Project 2016 for agile projects
C a s e W r a p - U p
Kim Nguyen reviewed guidelines for creating WBSs that were provided by her company
and other sources. She had a meeting with the three team leaders for her project to get
their input on how to proceed. They reviewed several sample documents and decided
to have major groupings for their project based on updating the inventory database,
acquiring the necessary hardware and software, installing the hardware and software,
and performing project management. After they decided on a basic approach, Kim led
a meeting with the entire project team of 12 people, with some attending virtually. She
reviewed the project charter and stakeholder register, described the basic approach they
would use to collect requirements and define the project scope, and reviewed sample
WBSs. Kim opened the floor for questions, which she answered confidently. She then
let each team leader work with his or her people to start writing the detailed scope
statement and their sections of the WBS and WBS dictionary. Everyone participated in
the meeting, sharing their expertise and openly asking questions. Kim could see that the
project was off to a good start.
Project Scope Management
233
Chapter Summary
Project scope management includes the processes to ensure that the project addresses all the
work required to complete the project successfully. The main processes include planning scope
management, collecting requirements, defining scope, creating the WBS, validating scope, and
controlling scope.
The first step in project scope management is planning scope management. The project
team reviews information and uses expert judgment and meetings to help create a scope
management plan and requirements management plan.
The next step is collecting requirements, a crucial part of many IT projects. It is important to
review the project charter and meet with key stakeholders listed in the stakeholder register when
collecting requirements. The main outputs of this process are requirements documentation and a
requirements traceability matrix.
A project scope statement is created in the scope definition process. This document often
includes a product scope description, product user acceptance criteria, detailed information on
all project deliverables, and information on project boundaries, constraints, and assumptions.
There are often several versions of the project scope statement to keep scope information
detailed and up to date.
A work breakdown structure (WBS) is a deliverable-oriented grouping of the work involved in
a project that defines its total scope. The WBS forms the basis for planning and managing project
schedules, costs, resources, and changes. You cannot use project management software without
first creating a good WBS. A WBS dictionary is a document that provides detailed information
about each WBS item. A good WBS is often difficult to create because of the complexity of the
project. There are several approaches for developing a WBS, including using guidelines, the
analogy approach, the top-down approach, the bottom-up approach, and mind mapping.
Validating scope involves formal acceptance of the completed project deliverables.
Controlling scope involves controlling changes to the project scope.
Poor project scope management is one of the key reasons projects fail. For IT projects, it
is important for good project scope management to have strong user involvement, executive
support, a clear statement of requirements, and a process for managing scope changes.
Many software products are available to assist in project scope management. The WBS is
a key concept in properly using project management software because it provides the basis for
entering tasks.
Be sure to consider how project scope management can differ in agile/adaptive environments.
Discussion Questions
1. What is involved in project scope management, and why is good project scope management
so important on IT projects?
2. What is involved in collecting requirements for a project? Why is it often difficult to do?
3. Discuss the process of defining project scope in more detail as a project progresses,
going from information in a project charter to a project scope statement, WBS, and WBS
dictionary.
Chapter 5
234
4. Describe different ways to develop a WBS and explain why it is often so difficult to do.
5. What is the main technique used for validating scope? Give an example of scope validation
on a project.
6. Using examples in this book or online, describe a project that suffered from scope creep.
Could it have been avoided? How? Can scope creep be a good thing? When? What can
organizations do to successfully manage inevitable changes in scope that are good for
business?
7. Why do you need a good WBS to use project management software? What other types of
software can you use to assist in project scope management?
8. How is scope management different on agile projects?
Quick Quiz
1. ____________ refer(s) to all the work involved in creating the products of the project and
the processes used to create them.
a.
Deliverables
b.
Milestones
c.
Scope
d.
Product development
2. Which tool or technique for collecting requirements is often the most expensive and time
consuming?
a.
Interviews
b.
Focus groups
c.
Surveys
d.
Observation
3. A ____________ is a deliverable-oriented grouping of the work involved in a project that
defines its total scope.
a.
scope statement
b.
WBS
c.
WBS dictionary
d.
work package
4. What approach to developing a WBS involves writing down or drawing ideas in a nonlinear
format?
a.
Top-down
b.
Bottom-up
c.
Analogy
d.
Mind mapping
Project Scope Management
235
5. Assume that you have a project with major categories called planning, analysis, design, and
testing. What level of the WBS would these items fall under?
a.
0
b.
1
c.
2
d.
3
6. Which of the following is not a best practice that can help in avoiding scope problems on IT
projects?
a.
Keep the scope realistic.
b.
Use off-the-shelf hardware and software whenever possible.
c.
Follow good project management processes.
d.
Don't involve too many users in scope management.
7. What constitutes requirements for agile projects?
a.
The Scrum
b.
The backlog
c.
The sprints
d.
The requirements list
8. Scope ____________ is often achieved by a customer inspection and then sign-off on key
deliverables.
a.
acceptance
b.
validation
c.
completion
d.
close-out
9. Which of the following is not a suggestion for improving user input?
a.
Develop a good project selection process for IT projects.
b.
Have users on the project team.
c.
Co-locate users with developers.
d.
Only have meetings as needed, not on a regular basis.
10. Project management software helps you develop a ____________, which serves as a basis
for creating Gantt charts, assigning resources, and allocating costs.
a.
project plan
b.
schedule
c.
WBS
d.
deliverable
Quick Quiz Answers
1. c; 2. a; 3. b; 4. d; 5. c; 6. d; 7. b; 8. b; 9. d; 10. c
Chapter 5
236
Exercises
1. You are working on a project to develop a new or enhanced system to help people at your
college, university, or organization to find jobs. The system must be tailored to your student
or work population and be very easy to use. Write a short paper describing how you would
collect requirements for this system, and include at least five requirements in a requirements
traceability matrix.
2. Read the report cited in the chapter called PMI's Pulse of the Profession: Requirements
Management-A Core Competency for Project and Program Success. Find one or two
other reports on requirements management written in the past year. Summarize the findings
of the reports and your opinion on the topic.
3. Use MindView or similar software to develop a WBS for a project of your choice. You can
use one of the examples in this chapter, or create your own. Take screenshots and print out
the WBS in various formats (mind map, chart, and tabular).
4. Create the same WBS from Exercise 3 using Microsoft Project or similar software and
indenting categories appropriately. Use the outline numbering feature to display the outline
numbers, or enter the numbers manually. Do not enter any durations or dependencies. See
Appendix A or Project 2016's Help for instructions on creating a WBS. Print the resulting
Gantt chart on one page, and be sure to display the entire Task Name column.
5. Using the file you created in MindView or similar software for Exercise 3, export the WBS
into Project 2016 or similar software. Make adjustments as needed and then print the Gantt
chart from Project 2016 or similar software. Also write a paragraph describing your opinion of
using a mind map versus just entering information in the Task Name column.
6. Create a WBS for one of the following projects:

Introducing self-checkout registers at your school's bookstore

Providing a new Internet cafe onsite at your organization

Developing an app that you and a friend will create and sell online within three months

Earning your CAPM or PMP certification

Decide on all of the Level 2 categories for the WBS. Use your choice of software to
create a WBS in chart form and as tasks in a Gantt chart. Do not enter any durations or
dependencies. Be sure to include all of the deliverables and work required for the project.
Make notes of questions you had while completing this exercise.
7. Review three different template files from Microsoft Project 2016, MindView, or any other
project management software tool. What do you think about the WBSs? Write a short paper
summarizing your analysis, and provide at least three suggestions for improving one of the
WBSs.
8. Research the benefits of and requirements for earning a certification in business analysis,
as described in the What Went Right feature in this chapter. Summarize your findings in a
short paper.
Project Scope Management
237
Running Case
You have been selected as the project manager for the Global Treps project. You helped to run
a local shark tank like event at your college last year as part of a class project, so you have a
general idea of what is involved. The schedule goal is six months, and the budget is $120,000.
Your favorite professor, Dr. K., and a few of her associates have agreed to fund the project. Your
strengths are your organizational and leadership skills.
You are a senior, live on-campus, and get free room and board by being a resident assistant
in your dorm. Bobby, a computer whiz who funded a lot of his college expenses by building
websites, will be your main technical guy on the project. He goes to your college and lives
off-campus. Three other people will form your core project team: Kim, a new college grad now
working for a non profit group in Vietnam; Ashok, a business student in India; and Alfreda, a
student in the United States planning to visit her home town in Ethiopia for two months in a few
months. You will hold most meetings virtually, but you can meet face-to-face with Bobby and
Dr. K. as needed. You have all known each other for at least a year and are excited to make this
project a success.
You and your team members will do the work part-time while you finish school or work at
other jobs, but you can use up to $50,000 total to pay yourselves. You estimate that you will need
another $30,000 for travel expenses, $20,000 for hardware and software, and the other $20,000
will go toward organizing events, consultants, legal/business fees, etc.
Your goal is to develop a fully functioning website and test it by holding four events in four
different countries. You'll make improvements to the site after those events, develop plans to
scale it up, and recommend how to transition the project results into a successful business.
Recall from Chapter 4 that this system would include the following capabilities:

Provide guidelines and templates for running a shark tank type event

Accept donations from potential investors targeted toward specific schools or
organizations wishing to host an event (similar to the popular DonorsChoose.org site,
where people can fund teachers' requests)

Accept ideas for needed new products or services

Provide the ability for organizations to create their own custom site to solicit local
participants and sharks, accept applications, and promote the winners as well as
losers.
Note that you decided not to include the idea of providing an online version of the event
as part of the initial project as your sponsor and team decided that physical events would be
most effective. You have also decided to limit the scope of this first project to provide the ability
for 20 organizations to create their own custom websites. Your team members will screen the
organizations and assist people in using the site to plan their events.
You plan to hold four shark tank like events within four months, using your team members
abroad to help organize and run those events, plus one at your college. Your semester has just
started, so you plan to hold your event at the end of the term. The project will fund refreshments
Chapter 5
238
for the events and prizes for the winners, with a budget of $1,000 for each event. You don't think
you'll get any donations via the new website before these events, but you'll try to have it set up to
accept donations by the last month.
You will create some short videos to show people how to use the site and provide
suggestions for holding the events.
After testing the site and getting customer feedback, you will make some changes and
document recommendations for a follow-on project. You will also create a business plan
recommending how to transition this project into a real business that can make a profit after two
years.
Assume that you would pay for a new website and account through an online provider.
Bobby would do most of the customization/programming for the site, but you would consider
outsourcing or purchasing services to provide some of the capabilities like accepting donations
and developing the short videos on the site. You would also buy a new laptop and Internet
access for your three team members abroad so that they could share information with their
contacts in those countries.
You and Dr. K. want to attend all of the events as part of the project, and you might include a
full face-to-face meeting with the whole team if possible.
Tasks
1. Document your approach for collecting requirements for the project. Include at least five
technical requirements and five non technical requirements in a requirements traceability
matrix. Also develop a list of at least five questions you would like to ask the project sponsor.
Let your instructor answer them for you, if applicable.
2. Develop a first version of a project scope statement for the project. Use the template
provided on the Companion website for this text and the example in Chapter 3 as guides.
Be as specific as possible in describing product characteristics and requirements, as well as
all of the project's deliverables. Be sure to include the Global Treps website, four shark tank
like events, a business plan, and outsourced items (laptops, donation acceptance, video
creation, etc.) as part of the project scope.
3. Develop a work breakdown structure for the project. Break down the work to Level 3 or Level 4,
as appropriate. Use the template on the Companion website and samples in this text as
guides. Print the WBS in list form. Be sure the WBS is based on the project charter (created
for the Chapter 4 Running Case), the project scope statement created in Task 2 above, and
other relevant information.
4. Use the WBS you developed in Task 3 to begin creating a Gantt chart using your choice of
software. Do not enter any durations or dependencies. Print the resulting Gantt chart on one
page, and be sure to display the entire Task Name column.
5. Develop a strategy for scope validation and change control for this project. Write a short
paper summarizing key points of the strategy.
Project Scope Management
239
Key Terms
analogy approach
benchmarking
bottom-up approach
decomposition
deliverable
Joint Application Design (JAD)
project scope management
project scope statement
prototyping
requirement
requirements management plan
requirements traceability matrix (RTM)
scope
scope baseline
scope creep
scope validation
top-down approach
use case modeling
variance
WBS dictionary
work breakdown structure (WBS)
work package
Endnotes

1 Karl Wiegers, Software Requirements, Second edition (Redmond, WA: Microsoft Press,
2003), p. 7.

2 Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of
Knowledge (PMBOK Guide) - Sixth Edition (2017), p. 140.

3 Amy Hillman, "The Rise in Business-Analytics Degrees," Huffington Post (May 13, 2014).

4 Project Management Institute, Pulse of the Profession: Requirements Management
(August 2014).

5 Craig Smith, "Interview and Book Review: How Google Tests Software," www.infoq.com
(­September 11, 2012).

6 John Simpson, "2011: The State of Requirements Management" (2011).

7 Project Management Institute, Pulse of the Profession: Requirements Management-
A Core Competency for Project and Program Success (August 2014).

8 Mindjet Visual Thinking, "About Mind Maps," www.mindjet.com (2002).

9 David I. Cleland, Project Management: Strategic Design and Implementation, Second
edition (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994).

10 Geoffrey James, "Information Technology Fiascoes ... and How to Avoid Them," Datamation
(November 1997).

11 Paul McDougall, "8 Expensive IT Blunders," InformationWeek (October 16, 2006).

12 Op. cit.

13 Marc L. Songini, "21st Century Insurance Apps in Limbo Despite $100M Investment,"
Computerworld (December 6, 2002).
Chapter 5
240

14 www.ptv.vic.gov.au/tickets/myki/ (accessed March 1, 2012).

15 Megan Levy, "Peak-Hour Test for myki Smartcard System," The Age (July 26, 2010).

16 Greg Thom, "When It Comes to myki, Like It or Lump It," Herald Sun (January 20, 2012).

17 Alex White, "The $1.5 Billion myki Debacle Labor Doesn't Want to Know About," Herald Sun
(January 3, 2015).

18 Andy Crowe, Alpha Project Managers: What the Top 2 percent Know That Everyone Else
Does Not (Kennesaw, GA: Velociteach Press, 2006), pp. 46-47.

19 Julia King, "IS Reins in Runaway Projects," Computerworld (September 24, 1997).

20 Thomas E. Murphy, "Market Guide for Software Requirements Definition and Management
Solutions," Gartner (October 7, 2014).

21 Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of
Knowledge (PMBOK Guide) - Sixth Edition (2017), p. 133.
C h a p t e r 6
Project Schedule
Management
L e a r n i n g O b j e c t i v e s
After reading this chapter, you will be able to:

Illustrate the importance that project schedules and good project
schedule management can have in helping to make projects successful

Discuss the process of planning schedule management

Define activities as the basis for developing project schedules

Describe how project managers use network diagrams and dependencies
to assist in activity sequencing

Explain how various tools and techniques help project managers perform
activity duration estimates

Use a Gantt chart for planning and tracking schedule information, find the
critical path for a project, and describe how critical chain scheduling and
the Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) affect schedule
development

Compare how schedule management is addressed using Agile vs. more
predictive project approaches

Discuss how reality checks and discipline are involved in controlling and
managing changes to the project schedule

Describe how project management software can assist in project schedule
management and review words of caution before using this software

Discuss considerations for agile/adaptive environments
Chapter 6
242
The Importance of Project Schedules
Managers often cite the need to deliver projects on time as one of their biggest challenges
and the main cause of conflict. Perhaps part of the reason that schedule problems are
so common is that time is easily measured and remembered. You can debate scope and
cost overruns and make actual numbers appear closer to estimates, but once a project
schedule is set, people remember the projected completion date, and anyone can quickly
estimate schedule performance by subtracting the original time estimate from how long
it really took to complete the project. People often compare planned and actual project
completion times without taking into account the approved changes in the project. Time is
the variable that has the least amount of flexibility. Time passes no matter what happens
on a project.
Individual work styles and cultural differences may also cause schedule conflicts.
For example, you will learn in Chapter 9, Project Resource Management, about the
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator. One dimension of this team-building tool deals with
attitudes toward structure and deadlines. Some people prefer detailed schedules and
emphasize task completion. Others prefer to keep things open and flexible. Different
cultures and even entire countries have different attitudes about schedules. For
example, in some countries businesses close for several hours every afternoon to have
siestas. Countries may have different holidays, which means not much work will be
done at certain times of the year. Cultures may also have different perceptions of work
O p e n i n g C a s e
Sue Johnson was the project manager for a consulting company contracted to
provide a new online registration system at a local college in nine months or less.
This system had to be operational by May 1 so students could use it to register for
the fall semester. Her company's contract had a stiff penalty clause if the system was
not ready by then, and Sue and her team would get nice bonuses for doing a good
job on this project and meeting the schedule. Sue knew that it was her responsibility
to meet the schedule and manage scope, cost, and quality expectations. She and
her team developed a detailed schedule and network diagram to help organize the
project.
Developing the schedule turned out to be the easy part; keeping the project on track
was more difficult. Managing personnel issues and resolving schedule conflicts were
two of the bigger challenges. Many of the college's employees took unplanned vacations
and missed or rescheduled project review meetings. These changes made it difficult for
the project team to follow the planned schedule for the system because the team had
to have customer sign-off at various stages of the systems development life cycle. One
senior programmer on Sue's project team quit, and she knew it would take extra time
for a new person to get up to speed, especially since the exiting programmer did a poor
job documenting how his code linked to other systems at the college. It was still early
in the project, but Sue knew they were falling behind. What could she do to meet the
operational date of May 1?
Project Schedule Management
243
ethic-some may value hard work and strict schedules while others may value the
ability to remain relaxed and flexible.
With all the possibilities for schedule conflicts, it is important for project managers to
use good project schedule management. Project schedule management, simply defined,
involves the processes required to ensure timely completion of a project. Six main
processes are involved in project schedule management:
1.
Planning schedule management involves determining the policies, procedures,
and documentation that will be used for planning, executing, and controlling
the project schedule.
2. Defining activities involves identifying the specific activities that the project
team members and stakeholders must perform to produce the project
M e d i a S n a p s h o t
In contrast to the 2002 Salt Lake City Winter Olympic Games (see Chapter 4's Media
Snapshot), planning and scheduling were not well implemented for the 2004 Athens
Summer Olympic Games or the 2014 Sochi Winter Olympic Games.
Many articles written before the Athens opening ceremonies predicted that the
facilities would not be ready in time. "With just 162 days to go to the opening of the
Athens Olympics, the Greek capital is still not ready for the expected onslaught. . . . By
now 22 of the 30 Olympic projects were supposed to be finished. This week the Athens
Olympic Committee proudly announced 19 venues would be finished by the end of next
month. That's a long way off target."1 However, many people were pleasantly surprised
by the amazing opening ceremonies, beautiful new buildings, and state-of-the-art
security and transportation systems in Athens. For example, traffic flow, considered
a major pre-Games hurdle, was superb. One spectator at the games commented on
the prediction that the facilities would not be ready in time: "Athens proved them all
wrong. . . . It has never looked better."2 The Greeks even made fun of critics by having
construction workers pretend that they were still working as the ceremonies began.
Unfortunately, the Greek government suffered a huge financial deficit because the games
cost more than twice the planned budget.
The 2014 Winter Olympic Games in Sochi, Russia, suffered even greater financial
losses. Originally budgeted at US$12 billion, final costs reached over US$51 billion,
making it the most expensive games in history. Unlike Greece's humorous response to
challenges at the Athens games, Russian citizens were much more serious. Although
in 2006, 86 percent of Sochi residents supported the games, by 2013 only 40 percent
supported them. Russian citizens, especially those in Sochi, understood the negative
impacts of hosting the games when they heard about the poor planning and huge cost
overruns. ". . . the Sochi Olympics will continue to be a burden for the Russian state,
with expenses for operation, maintenance and foregone interest and tax revenue in the
order of USD 1.2 billion per year. The event also did not manage to improve the image of
Russia in the world and among the domestic population support dropped over the seven
years of its implementation, most notably among the local population."3
Chapter 6
244
deliverables. An activity or task is an element of work normally found on
the work breakdown structure (WBS) that has expected duration, cost, and
resource requirements.
3. Sequencing activities involves identifying and documenting the relationships
between project activities. Requirements, a resource breakdown structure,
and project documents updates.
4. Estimating activity durations involves estimating the number of work
periods that are needed to complete individual activities.
5. Developing the schedule involves analyzing activity sequences, resource
requirements, and activity duration estimates to create the project schedule.
6. Controlling the schedule involves controlling and managing changes to the
project schedule.
Figure 6-1 summarizes the inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of project
schedule management.
You can improve project schedule management by performing these processes and
by using some basic project management tools and techniques. Every manager is familiar
with some form of scheduling, but most managers have not used several of the tools
and techniques that are unique to project schedule management, such as Gantt charts,
network diagrams, and critical path analysis.
Planning Schedule Management
The first step in project schedule management is planning how the schedule will
be managed throughout the life of the project. Project schedules grow out of the
basic documents that initiate a project. The project charter often mentions planned
project start and end dates, which serve as the starting points for a more detailed
schedule. After reviewing the project management plan, project charter, enterprise
environmental factors, and organizational process assets, the project team uses
expert judgment, analytical techniques, and meetings to develop the schedule
management plan.
The schedule management plan, like the scope management plan, can be informal
and broad or formal and detailed, based on the needs of the project. In general, a schedule
management plan includes the following information:

Project schedule model development: Many projects include a schedule model,
which contains project activities with estimated durations, dependencies, and
other planning information that can be used to produce a project schedule.
See Appendix A (available on the Companion website for this text) for
information on using Microsoft Project 2016 to create a schedule model.

Level of accuracy and units of measure: This section discusses how accurate
schedule estimates should be and determines whether time is measured in
hours, days, or another unit.

Control thresholds: Variance thresholds, such as 610 percent, are established
for monitoring schedule performance.
Project Schedule Management
245
Figure 6-1  Project schedule management overview
6.1 Plan Schedule
Management
6.4 Estimate Activity
Durations
6.5 Develop Schedule
6.6 Control Schedule
.1 Inputs
.1 Project charter
.2 Project management plan
.3 Enterprise environmental
factors
.4 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Data analysis
.3 Meetings
.3 Outputs
.1 Schedule management plan
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Enterprise environmental
factors
.3 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Decomposition
.3 Rolling wave planning
.4 Meetings
.3 Outputs
.1 Activity list
.2 Activity attributes
.3 Milestone list
.4 Change requests
.5 Project management plan
updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Enterprise environmental
factors
.4 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Precedence diagramming
method
.2 Dependency determination
and integration
.3 Leads and lags
.4 Project management
information system
.3 Outputs
.1 Project schedule network
diagrams
.2 Project documents updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Enterprise environmental
factors
.4 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Analogous estimating
.3 Parametric estimating
.4 Three-point estimating
.5 Bottom-up estimating
.6 Data analysis
.7 Decision making
.8 Meetings
.3 Outputs
.1 Duration estimates
.2 Basis of estimates
.3 Project documents updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Work performance data
.4 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Data analysis
.2 Critical path method
.3 Project management
information system
.4 Resource optimization
.5 Leads and lags
.6 Schedule compression
.3 Outputs
.1 Work performance
information
.2 Schedule forecasts
.3 Change requests
.4 Project management plan
updates
.5 Project documents updates
6.2 Deﬁne Activities
6.3 Sequence Activities
Project Schedule
Management Overview
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Agreements
.4 Enterprise environmental
factors
.5 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Schedule network analysis
.2 Critical path method
.3 Resource optimization
.4 Data analysis
.5 Leads and lags
.6 Schedule compression
.7 Project management
information system
.8 Agile release planning
.3 Outputs
.1 Schedule baseline
.2 Project schedule
.3 Schedule data
.4 Project calendars
.5 Change requests
.6 Project management plan
updates
.7 Project documents updates
Source: PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition. Project Management Institute, Inc. (2017). Copyright and
all rights reserved. Material from this publication has been reproduced with permission of PMI.
Chapter 6
246

Rules of performance measurement: For example, if team members are
expected to track the percentage of work completed, this section specifies
how to determine the percentages.

Reporting formats: This section describes the format and frequency of
schedule reports required for the project.

Process descriptions: The schedule management plan also describes how all
of the schedule management processes will be performed.
Defining Activities
You might think that all project work has been defined in enough detail after planning
scope management, but it is often necessary to describe activities in more detail as part
of schedule management. Defining activities involves identifying the specific actions
that will produce the project deliverables in enough detail to determine resource and
schedule estimates. The project team reviews the project management plan, enterprise
environmental factors, and organizational process assets to begin defining activities.
Outputs of this process include an activity list, activity attributes, a milestone list, change
requests, and project management plan updates.
The activity list is a tabulation of activities to be included on a project schedule.
The list should include the activity name, an activity identifier or number, and a brief
description of the activity. The activity attributes provide schedule-related information
about each activity, such as predecessors, successors, logical relationships, leads and lags,
resource requirements, constraints, imposed dates, and assumptions related to the activity.
The activity list and activity attributes should agree with the WBS and WBS dictionary.
Information is added to the activity attributes as it becomes available; this information
includes logical relationships and resource requirements that are determined in later
processes. Many project teams use an automated system to keep track of activity-related
information.
A milestone on a project is a significant event that normally has no duration.
It often takes several activities and a lot of work to complete a milestone, but the
milestone itself is a marker to help in identifying necessary activities. Milestones are
also useful tools for setting schedule goals and monitoring progress. For example,
milestones on a project like the one in the chapter's opening case might include
completion and customer sign-off documents, such as design documents and test
plans; completion of specific products, such as software modules or installation of new
hardware; and completion of important process-related work, such as project review
meetings and tests. Not every deliverable or output created for a project is really a
milestone. Milestones are the most important and visible events. For example, in the
context of child development, parents and doctors check for milestones, such as a
child first rolling over, sitting, crawling, walking, and talking. You will learn more about
milestones later in this chapter.
Activity information is a required input to the other schedule management processes.
You cannot determine activity sequencing, durations, develop the schedule, or control the
schedule until you have a good understanding of project activities.
Project Schedule Management
247
Recall the triple constraint of project management-balancing scope, time, and cost
goals-and note the order of these items. Ideally, the project team and key stakeholders
first define the project scope, then the time or schedule for the project, and then the
project's cost. The order of these three items reflects the basic order of the processes in
project schedule management: defining activities (further defining the scope), sequencing
activities (further defining the time), and estimating activity resources and activity
durations (further defining the time and cost). These processes are the basis for creating a
project schedule.
The goal of defining activities is to ensure that the project team completely
understands all the work it must do as part of the project scope so they can start
scheduling the work. For example, a WBS item might be "Study report." The project
team must understand what the item means before team members can make schedule-
related decisions. How long should the report be? Does it require a survey or extensive
research to produce? What skill level does the report writer need to have? Further
defining the task will help the project team determine how long it will take to do and
who should do it.
The WBS is often dissected further as the project team members continue to define
the activities required for performing the work. For example, the task "Study report"
might be broken down into several subtasks describing smaller deliverables required to
produce the report, such as survey development, survey administration, draft report,
report edits, and final report. This process of progressive elaboration, one of the project
attributes listed in Chapter 1, is sometimes called "rolling wave planning."
As stated earlier, activities (or tasks, the term used in most project management
software) are elements of work performed during the course of a project; they have
expected durations, costs, and resource requirements. Defining activities also results
in supporting detail to document important product information as well as assumptions
and constraints related to specific activities. The project team should review the activity
list and activity attributes with project stakeholders before moving on to the next step
in project schedule management. If the team does not review these items with project
stakeholders, it could produce an unrealistic schedule and deliver unacceptable results.
For example, if a project manager simply estimated that the "time required to complete
the Study report" deliverable would be one day and then had an intern or trainee write
a 10-page report to complete that task, the result could be a furious customer who
expected extensive research, surveys, and a 100-page report. Clearly defining the work
is crucial to all projects. If there are misunderstandings about activities, requested
changes may be required.
In the opening case of this chapter, Sue Johnson and her project team had a
contract and detailed specifications for the college's new online registration system.
They also had to focus on meeting the May 1 date for delivering an operational system
so the college could start using the new system for the new semester's registration.
To develop a project schedule, Sue and her team had to review the contract, detailed
specifications, and desired operational date, then create an activity list, activity
attributes, and milestone list. After developing more detailed definitions of project
activities, Sue and her team would review them with the customers to ensure that the
team was on the right track.
Chapter 6
248
Sequencing Activities
After defining project activities, the next step in project schedule management is
sequencing them or determining their dependencies. Inputs to the activity sequencing
process include the project management plan, project documents (like the activity
attributes, activity list, assumption log, and milestone list), enterprise environmental
factors, and organizational process assets. The sequencing process involves evaluating the
reasons for dependencies and the different types of dependencies.
Dependencies
A dependency or relationship pertains to the sequencing of project activities or tasks.
For example, does a certain activity have to be finished before another can start? Can
the project team do several activities in parallel? Can some overlap? Determining these
W h a t W e n t W r o n g ?
At the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), poor time management was one of
the reasons behind the failure of Trilogy, a "disastrous, unbelievably expensive piece
of vaporware, which was more than four years in the (un)making. The system was
supposed to enable FBI agents to integrate intelligence from isolated information silos
within the Bureau."4 In May 2006, the Government Accounting Agency said that the
Trilogy project failed at its core mission of improving the FBI's investigative abilities and
was plagued with missed milestones and escalating costs.
The FBI rushed to develop the new system beginning in 2001, in response to the
attacks on September 11. The need for new software was obvious to former FBI agent
David J. Williams, who recalls joining a roomful of agents shortly after 9/11 to help
with intelligence. Agents were wearing out the casters on their chairs by sliding back
and forth among 20 old computer terminals, many of which were attached to various
databases that contained different information.
Congressional hearings revealed numerous problems with the project. Its
requirements were very loosely defined, there were many leadership changes throughout
the project, and several contracts had no scheduled milestones for completion or
penalties if work was late. The new system was finally completed in 2006 and cost more
than $537 million-more than a year late and $200 million over budget.
The FBI replaced Trilogy with a new system called Sentinel and began training
employees to use it in May 2007.5 Unfortunately, history repeated itself as troubles
still loomed with Sentinel in 2012. According to the FBI's original plan, Sentinel was
to be completed by December 2009 at an estimated cost of $425 million. The FBI later
increased the estimated cost to $451 million and extended the project completion date
twice, so that the project was now two years behind schedule. During a test exercise
in 2011, the system experienced two outages, and the FBI determined that its current
hardware structure was inadequate. In 2014, several people complained that the system
still wasn't working well. "You can't find what you need most of the time, or you get junk
you don't want, but other than that, the FBI's long troubled, half-billion-dollar Sentinel
computerized file system is coming along just fine."6
Project Schedule Management
249
relationships or dependencies among activities is crucial for developing and managing a
project schedule.
There are several types of dependencies among project activities:

Mandatory dependencies are inherent in the nature of the work being
performed on a project. They are sometimes referred to as hard logic. For
example, you cannot test code until after the code is written.

Discretionary dependencies are defined by the project team. For example,
a project team might follow good practice and not start the detailed design
of a new information system until the users sign off on all of the analysis
work. Discretionary dependencies are sometimes referred to as soft logic and
should be used with care because they may limit later scheduling options.

External dependencies involve relationships between project and non-
project activities. For example, the installation of a new operating system and
other software may depend on delivery of new hardware from an external
supplier. Even though delivery of the hardware may not be included in the
scope of the project, you should add an external dependency to it because
late delivery will affect the project schedule.

Internal dependencies involve relationships between project activities that
are generally inside the project team's control. For example, if software is
developed by the team, they can create dependencies such as performing
unit testing before system testing.
Note that dependencies can be internal and mandatory, external and discretionary,
and so on. As with activity definition, it is important that project stakeholders work
together to define the activity dependencies in their project. If you do not define the
sequence of activities, you cannot use some of the most powerful scheduling tools
available to project managers: network diagrams and critical path analysis.
Network Diagrams
Network diagrams are the preferred technique for showing activity sequencing. A network
diagram is a schematic display of the logical relationships among project activities and
their sequencing. Some people refer to network diagrams as project schedule network
diagrams or PERT charts. PERT is described later in this chapter. Figure 6-2 shows a
sample network diagram for Project X.
Note the main elements on this network diagram. The letters A through J represent
activities with dependencies that are required to complete the project. These activities
come from the WBS and activity definition process described earlier. The arrows represent
the activity sequencing or relationships between tasks. For example, Activity A must be
done before Activity D, and Activity D must be done before Activity H.
The format of this network diagram uses the activity-on-arrow (AOA) approach or
the arrow diagramming method (ADM)-a network diagramming technique in which
activities are represented by arrows and connected at points called nodes to illustrate the
sequence of activities. A node is simply the starting and ending point of an activity. The
first node signifies the start of a project and the last node represents the end.
Keep in mind that the network diagram represents activities that must be done to
complete the project. It is not a race to get from the first node to the last node. Every
Chapter 6
250
activity on the network diagram must be completed in order to finish the project. Note also
that not every item on the WBS needs to be shown on the network diagram; only activities
with dependencies need to be shown. However, some people like to have start and end
milestones and to list every activity. It is a matter of preference. For large projects with
hundreds of activities, it might be simpler to include only activities with dependencies on
a network diagram. Sometimes it is enough to put summary tasks on a network diagram or
to break down the project into several smaller network diagrams.
Assuming that you have a list of the project activities and their start and finish nodes,
follow these steps to create an AOA network diagram:
1. Find all of the activities that start at Node 1. Draw their finish nodes, and
draw arrows between Node 1 and each of the finish nodes. Put the activity
letter or name on the associated arrow. If you have a duration estimate, write
it next to the activity letter or name, as shown in Figure 6-2. For example,
A 5 1 means that the duration of Activity A is one day, week, or other
standard unit of time. Be sure to put arrowheads on all arrows to signify the
direction of the relationships.
2. Continue drawing the network diagram, working from left to right. Look for
bursts and merges. Bursts occur when two or more activities follow a single
node. A merge occurs when two or more nodes precede a single node. For
example, in Figure 6-2, Node 1 is a burst because it goes into Nodes 2, 3, and
4. Node 5 is a merge preceded by Nodes 2 and 3.
3. Continue drawing the AOA network diagram until all activities are included.
4. As a rule of thumb, all arrowheads should face toward the right, and no
arrows should cross on an AOA network diagram. You may need to redraw
the diagram to make it look presentable.
Even though AOA or ADM network diagrams are generally easy to understand and
create, a different method is more commonly used: the precedence diagramming method.
Figure 6-2  Network diagram for project X
Note: Assume all durations are in days; A=1 means Activity A has a

duration of 1 day.
8
6
7
5
2
3
4
A = 1
B = 2
C = 3
D = 4
E = 5
F = 4
G = 6
I = 2
H = 6
J = 3
1
Project Schedule Management
251
The precedence diagramming method (PDM) is a network diagramming technique in
which boxes represent activities. It is particularly useful for visualizing certain types of
time relationships.
Figure 6-3 illustrates the types of dependencies that can occur among project
activities based on a Microsoft Project help screen. After you determine the reason for
a dependency between activities (mandatory, discretionary, or external), you must
determine the type of dependency. Note that the terms activity and task are used
interchangeably, as are relationship and dependency. The four types of dependencies or
relationships between activities include the following:

Finish-to-start dependency: A relationship in which the "from" activity
or predecessor must finish before the "to" activity or successor can start.
For example, you cannot provide user training until after software or a
new system has been installed. Finish-to-start is the most common type of
relationship or dependency, and AOA network diagrams use only finish-to-
start dependencies.

Start-to-start dependency: A relationship in which the "from" activity
cannot start until the "to" activity or successor is started. For example, on IT
projects, a group of activities might start simultaneously, such as the many
tasks that occur when a new system goes live.

Finish-to-finish dependency: A relationship in which the "from" activity
must be finished before the "to" activity can be finished. One task cannot
finish before another finishes. For example, quality control efforts cannot
Figure 6-3  Task dependency types
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
The nature of the relationship between two linked tasks. You link tasks by deﬁning a
dependency between their ﬁnish and start dates. For example, the "Contact caterers"
task must ﬁnish before the start of the "Determine menus" task. There are four kinds
of task dependencies in Microsoft Project.
Finish-to-start (FS)
Task (B) cannot start until task (A)
ﬁnishes.
Task (B) cannot start until task (A)
starts.
Task (B) cannot ﬁnish until task (A)
ﬁnishes.
Task (B) cannot ﬁnish until task (A)
starts.
Task dependencies
Task dependency
Example
Description
Start-to-start (SS)
Finish-to-ﬁnish (FF)
Start-to-ﬁnish (SF)
Chapter 6
252
finish before production finishes, although the two activities can be
performed at the same time.

Start-to-finish dependency: A relationship in which the "from" activity must
start before the "to" activity can be finished. This type of relationship is
rarely used, but it is appropriate in some cases. For example, an organization
might strive to stock raw materials just in time for the manufacturing
process to begin. A delay in starting the manufacturing process should delay
completion of stocking the raw materials. Another example would be a
babysitter who wants to finish watching a young child but is dependent on
the parent's arrival. The parent must show up or "start" before the babysitter
can finish the task.
Figure 6-4 illustrates Project X using the precedence diagramming method.
Notice that the activities are placed inside boxes, which represent the nodes on this
diagram. Arrows show the relationships between activities. This figure was created
using Microsoft Project, which automatically places additional information inside each
node. Each task box includes the start and finish dates, which are labeled Start and
Finish; the task ID number, labeled ID; the task's duration, labeled Dur; and the names
of resources, if any, that are assigned to the task. These resources are labeled Res.
The border of boxes for tasks on the critical path appears automatically in red in the
Microsoft Project network diagram view.
The precedence diagramming method is used more often than AOA network
diagrams and offers a number of advantages over the AOA technique. First, most project
management software uses the precedence diagramming method. Second, using this
method avoids the need to use dummy activities. Dummy activities have no duration
and no resources, but are occasionally needed on AOA network diagrams to show logical
relationships between activities. These activities are represented with dashed arrow lines
and have zeros for their duration estimates. Third, the precedence diagramming method
shows different dependencies among tasks, whereas AOA network diagrams use only
finish-to-start dependencies. You will learn more about activity sequencing using Project
2016 in Appendix A (available on the Companion website for this text).
Figure 6-4  Precedence diagramming methods (PDM) network diagram for project X
Project Schedule Management
253
Estimating Activity Durations
After working with key stakeholders to define activities and determine their dependencies,
the next process in project schedule management is to estimate the duration of activities.
It is important to note that duration includes the actual amount of time worked on an
activity plus elapsed time. For example, even though it might take one workweek or five
workdays to do the actual work, the duration estimate might be two weeks to allow extra
time needed to obtain outside information. The people or resources assigned to a task
will also affect the task duration estimate. As another example, if someone asked for an
estimate of when you plan to finish reading a particular book, you might give an answer of
two months. Two months would be the duration estimate, even if you only plan to spend
20 hours actually reading the book.
Do not confuse duration with effort, which is the number of workdays or work hours
required to complete a task. (Duration is normally entered in the Duration column in software
such as Microsoft Project 2016, while effort is entered in a Work column. See Appendix A-
available on the Companion website for this text-for more information.) A duration estimate
of one day could be based on eight hours of work or 80 hours of work, assuming that multiple
people are working on a task that day. Duration relates to the time estimate on a calendar,
not the effort estimate. In the previous example, you might plan to spend 20 hours reading a
book-the effort estimate-and spread that time out over two months-the duration.
Of course, duration and effort are related, so project team members must
document their assumptions when creating duration estimates. The people who will
actually do the work, in particular, should have a lot of say in duration estimates
because their performances will be evaluated based on their ability to meet the
estimates. It is also helpful to review similar projects and seek the advice of experts in
estimating activity durations.
Project team members must also update the estimates as the project progresses. If
scope changes occur on the project, the duration estimates should be updated to reflect
those changes.
There are several inputs to activity duration estimates, including the project
management plan, project documents, enterprise environmental factors, and
organizational process assets. In addition to reviewing past project information, the team
should review the accuracy of the duration estimates thus far on the project. For example,
if team members find that all of their estimates have been much too long or short, they
should update the estimates to reflect what they have learned.
One of the most important considerations in making activity duration estimates
is the availability of resources, especially human resources. What specific skills do
people need to do the work? What are the skill levels of the people assigned to the
project? How many people are expected to be available to work on the project at any
one time? Estimating activity resources is described in Chapter 9, Project Resource
Management.
The outputs of activity duration estimates include the estimates themselves, the
basis of estimates, and project documents updates. Duration estimates are often
provided as a discrete number, such as four weeks; as a range, such as three to five
weeks; or as a three-point estimate. A three-point estimate includes an optimistic,
Chapter 6
254
a most likely, and a pessimistic estimate, such as three weeks for the optimistic
scenario, four weeks for the most likely scenario, and five weeks for the pessimistic
scenario. The optimistic estimate is based on a best-case scenario, while the
pessimistic estimate is based on a worst-case scenario. The most likely estimate,
as you might expect, is based on a most likely or expected scenario. A three-point
estimate is required for performing PERT estimates, as described later in this chapter,
and for performing Monte Carlo simulations, as described in Chapter 11, Project Risk
Management. Other duration estimating techniques include analogous and parametric
estimating and reserve analysis, as described in Chapter 7, Project Cost Management.
Expert judgment is also an important tool for developing good activity duration
estimates.
A d v i c e f o r Y o u n g P r o f e s s i o n a l s
Some people find estimating to be challenging, especially for their own work. How-
ever, it is very important to develop this skill. You don't want to be stressing yourself
out when you gave an overly optimistic estimate and need to work around the clock
to get something done, nor do you want to lose out on an opportunity because you
made a very high estimate that was unacceptable to a potential client or sponsor.
Practice estimating how long it takes you to do different activities, and then take
actual measurements. Defining the activity in detail, as described earlier in this
chapter, will help you to make better estimates about each part of the activity. Also,
don't be afraid to ask for help in making estimations. We often think that things take
less time than they actually do, and people with experience can help us be more
realistic with estimates. You could start with activities like writing reports, arranging
meetings, or creating a presentation. You might think you can develop a presentation
in four hours, for example, but you could find that you actually take twice or three
times that much because you have to think it through, revise, get opinions, format
graphics, or other similar parts of the activity. If you realize that an activity estimate
might not be a good one, let your team know as soon as possible so that adjustments
can be made early in the project.
Developing the Schedule
Schedule development uses the results of all the preceding project schedule management
processes to determine the start and end dates of the project and its activities. Project
schedule management processes often go through several iterations before a project schedule
is finalized. The ultimate goal of developing a realistic project schedule is to provide a basis
for monitoring project progress for the time dimension of the project. The main outputs
of this process are a schedule baseline, project schedule, schedule data, project calendars,
change requests, project management plan updates, and project documents updates. Some
Project Schedule Management
255
project teams create a computerized model to create a network diagram, enter resource
requirements and availability by time period, and adjust other information to quickly
generate alternative schedules. See Appendix A (available on the Companion website for this
text) for information on using Project 2016 to assist in schedule development.
A few of the tools and techniques for schedule development include the following:

A Gantt chart is a common tool for displaying project schedule information.

Critical path analysis is a very important tool for developing and controlling
project schedules.

Critical chain scheduling is a technique that focuses on limited resources
when creating a project schedule.

PERT analysis is a means for considering schedule risk on projects.
The following sections provide samples of each of these tools and techniques and
discuss their advantages and disadvantages.
Gantt Charts
Gantt charts provide a standard format for displaying project schedule information
by listing project activities and their corresponding start and finish dates in calendar
form. Gantt charts are sometimes referred to as bar charts because the activities' start
and end dates are shown as horizontal bars. Figure 6-5 shows a simple Gantt chart
for Project X created with Microsoft Project. Figure 6-6 shows a Gantt chart that is
more sophisticated and is based on a software launch project from a template provided
by Microsoft. The activities on the Gantt chart are driven by the deliverables on the
WBS, and should coincide in turn with the activity list and milestone list. Notice that
the Gantt chart for the software launch project contains milestones, summary tasks,
individual task durations, and arrows showing task dependencies.
Notice the different symbols on the Gantt chart for the software launch project (see
Figure 6-6):

The black diamond represents a milestone. In Figure 6-6, Task 6, "Scope
complete," is a milestone that occurs on January 17. For very large projects,
top managers might want to see only milestones on a Gantt chart. Microsoft
Project allows you to filter information displayed on a Gantt chart so you can
easily show specific tasks, such as milestones.

The thick black bars with rectangles at the beginning and end represent
summary tasks. For example, the activities listed in rows 2-5 are all
subtasks of the summary task called "Scope," Task 1. WBS activities are
referred to as tasks and subtasks in most project management software.

The light blue horizontal bars for Tasks 2, 3, 4, and 5 represent the duration of
each individual task.

Arrows connecting these symbols show relationships or dependencies
between tasks. Gantt charts often do not show dependencies, which is their
major disadvantage. If dependencies have been established in Microsoft
Project, they are automatically displayed on the Gantt chart.
Chapter 6
256
Figure 6-6  Gantt chart for software launch project
Figure 6-5  Gantt chart for project X
Project Schedule Management
257
Adding Milestones to Gantt Charts
Milestones can be a particularly important part of schedules, especially for large projects.
Many people like to focus on meeting milestones, so you can create them to emphasize
important events or accomplishments on projects. Normally, you create milestones
by entering tasks with zero duration. In Microsoft Project, you can mark any task as a
milestone by checking the appropriate box in the Advanced tab of the Task Information
dialog box. The duration of the task will not change to zero, but the Gantt chart will
show the milestone symbol to represent that task based on its start date. See Appendix A
(available on the Companion website for this text) for more information.
To make milestones meaningful, some people use the SMART criteria to help define
them. The SMART criteria are guidelines suggesting that milestones should be:

Specific

Measurable

Assignable

Realistic

Time-framed
For example, distributing a marketing plan is specific, measurable, and assignable if
everyone knows what should be in the marketing plan, how it should be distributed, how
many copies should be distributed and to whom, and who is responsible for the actual
delivery. Distributing the marketing plan is realistic and able to be time-framed if it is an
achievable event and scheduled at an appropriate time.
B e s t P r a c t i c e
In his book, The Happiness Advantage, Shawn Achor shares principles of positive
psychology that can fuel success at work. One problem many people have at work is
feeling overwhelmed. They complain that they are working all the time, but they cannot
get their work done. Achor suggests that the 20-second rule can help people improve
their focus by minimizing barriers to change.
The 20-second rule capitalizes on people's preference for taking the path of least
resistance. For example, you can more easily resist having an extra scoop of ice cream if
you have to wait 20 seconds in line for it rather than have it served to you. Many people
have trouble focusing on work because they are easily distracted by checking their
e-mail, stocks, news, social media, etc. Achor recommends making it more difficult for
yourself to be distracted. For example, keep e-mail closed while you are working. Don't
leave your favorite non-work-related websites open or have your passwords saved in
them. You can actually "save time by adding time"-but only to the distracting behaviors
at work.7
Chapter 6
258
Using Tracking Gantt Charts to Compare Planned and Actual Dates
You can use a special form of a Gantt chart to evaluate progress on a project by showing
actual schedule information. Figure 6-7 shows a Tracking Gantt chart-a Gantt chart
that compares planned and actual project schedule information. The planned schedule
dates for activities are called the baseline dates, and the entire approved planned
schedule is called the schedule baseline. The Tracking Gantt chart includes columns
labeled "Start" and "Finish" to represent actual start and finish dates for each task, as
well as columns labeled "Baseline Start" and "Baseline Finish" to represent planned
start and finish dates for each task. (These columns are hidden in Figure 6-7.) In this
example, the project is completed, but several tasks missed their planned start and
finish dates.
To serve as a progress evaluation tool, a Tracking Gantt chart uses a few additional
symbols:

Notice that the Gantt chart in Figure 6-7 often shows two horizontal
bars for tasks. The top horizontal bar represents the planned or baseline
duration for each task. The bar below it represents the actual duration.
Subtasks 1.2 and 1.3 illustrate this type of display. If these two bars are
the same length, meaning they start and end on the same dates, then the
actual schedule was the same as the planned schedule for that task. This
scheduling occurred for Subtask 1.1, in which the task started and ended
as planned on March 4. If the bars do not start and end on the same dates,
then the actual schedule differed from the planned or baseline schedule.
If the top horizontal bar is shorter than the bottom one, the task took
longer than planned, as you can see for Subtask 1.2. If the top horizontal
Figure 6-7  Sample tracking Gantt chart
Planned dates
Actual dates
Slipped milestone
Project Schedule Management
259
bar is longer than the bottom one, the task took less time than planned.
A striped horizontal bar, as illustrated by Main Tasks 1 and 2, represents
the planned duration for summary tasks. The black bar adjoining it shows
progress for summary tasks. For example, Main Task 2 clearly shows that
the actual duration took longer than planned.

A white diamond on the Tracking Gantt chart represents a slipped milestone.
A slipped milestone means the milestone activity was completed later than
originally planned. The last task provides an example of a slipped milestone
because the final report and presentation were completed later than planned.

Percentages to the right of the horizontal bars display the percentage of
work completed for each task. For example, 100 percent means the task is
finished, and 50 percent means the task is still in progress but is 50 percent
completed.
A Tracking Gantt chart is based on the percentage of work completed for project tasks
or the actual start and finish dates. It allows the project manager to monitor schedule
progress on individual tasks and the whole project. For example, Figure 6-7 shows that
the project is completed. It started on time, but it finished a little late, on May 13 (5/13)
instead of May 8.
The main advantage of using Gantt charts is that they provide a standard format for
displaying planned and actual project schedule information. In addition, they are easy
to create and understand. The main disadvantage of Gantt charts is that they do not
usually show relationships or dependencies between tasks. If Gantt charts are created
using project management software and tasks are linked, then the dependencies will be
displayed, but differently than they would be displayed on a network diagram. Whether
you view dependencies on a Gantt chart or network diagram is a matter of personal
preference.
Critical Path Method
Many projects fail to meet schedule expectations. Critical path method (CPM)-also
called critical path analysis-is a network diagramming technique used to predict total
project duration. This important tool helps you combat project schedule overruns. A critical
path for a project is the series of activities that determine the earliest time by which the
project can be completed. It is the longest path through the network diagram and has
the least amount of slack or float. Slack or float is the amount of time an activity may be
delayed without delaying a succeeding activity or the project finish date. Normally, several
tasks are done in parallel on projects, and most projects have multiple paths through a
network diagram. The longest path or the path that contains the critical tasks is what
drives the completion date for the project. You are not finished with the project until you
have finished all the tasks.
Calculating the Critical Path
To find the critical path for a project, you must first develop a good network diagram,
which in turn requires a good activity list based on the WBS. Once you create a network
diagram, you must also estimate the duration of each activity to determine the critical
Chapter 6
260
path. Calculating the critical path involves adding the durations for all activities on each
path through the network diagram. The longest path is the critical path.
Figure 6-8 shows the AOA network diagram for Project X again. Note that you can
use either the AOA or precedence diagramming method to determine the critical path on
projects. Figure 6-8 shows all of the paths-a total of four-through the network diagram.
Note that each path starts at the first node (1) and ends at the last node (8) on the AOA
network diagram. This figure also shows the length or total duration of each path through
the network diagram. These lengths are computed by adding the durations of each activity
on the path. Because path B-E-H-J has the longest duration at 16 days, it is the critical
path for the project.
What does the critical path really mean? Even though the critical path is the longest
path, it represents the shortest time required to complete a project. If one or more
activities on the critical path take longer than planned, the whole project schedule will
slip unless the project manager takes corrective action.
Project teams can be creative in managing the critical path. For example, Joan Knutson,
a well-known author and speaker in the project management field, often describes how a
gorilla helped Apple Inc. complete a project on time. Team members worked in an area with
cubicles, and whoever was in charge of the current task on the critical path had a stuffed
gorilla on top of his or her cubicle. Everyone knew that person was under the most time
pressure and did not need distractions. When a critical task was completed, the person in
charge of the next critical task received the gorilla.
Figure 6-8  Determining the critical path for project X
8
J = 3
Path 1:
Path 2:
Path 3:
Path 4:
A-D-H-J
B-E-H-J
B-F-J
C-G-I-J
Length = 1+4+6+3 = 14 days
Length = 2+5+6+3 = 16 days
Length = 2+4+3 = 9 days
Length = 3+6+2+3 = 14 days
Since the critical path is the longest path through the network diagram, Path 2,
B-E-H-J, is the critical path for Project X.
Note: Assume all durations are in days.
6
I = 2
H = 6
7
5
D = 4
E = 5
F = 4
G = 6
2
3
4
A = 1
B = 2
C = 3
1
Project Schedule Management
261
Growing Grass Can Be on the Critical Path
People are often confused about what a project's critical path really means. Some people
think the critical path includes the most critical activities, but it is concerned only with
the time dimension of a project. The fact that its name includes the word critical does
not mean that it includes all critical activities. For example, Frank Addeman, Executive
Project Director at Walt Disney Imagineering, explained in a keynote address at a PMI-
ISSIG Professional Development Seminar that growing grass was on the critical path
for building Disney's Animal Kingdom theme park! The 500-acre park required special
grass for its animal inhabitants, and some of the grass took years to grow. Another
misconception is that the critical path is the shortest path through the network diagram.
In some areas, such as transportation modeling, identifying the shortest path in network
diagrams is the goal. For a project, however, each task or activity on the critical path, as
well as other paths, must be done in order to complete the project. It is not a matter of
choosing the shortest path.
Other aspects of critical path analysis may cause confusion. Can there be more
than one critical path on a project? Does the critical path ever change? In the Project X
example, suppose that Activity A has a duration estimate of three days instead of one day.
This new duration estimate would make the length of Path 1 equal to 16 days. Now the
project has two longest paths of equal duration, so there are two critical paths. Therefore,
a project can have more than one critical path. Project managers should closely monitor
performance of activities on the critical path to avoid late project completion. If there is
more than one critical path, project managers must keep their eyes on all of them.
The critical path on a project can change as the project progresses. For example,
suppose everything is going as planned at the beginning of the project. Suppose that
Activities A, B, C, D, E, F, and G all start and finish as planned. Then suppose that Activity
I runs into problems. If Activity I takes more than four days, it will cause path C-G-I-J to be
longer than the other paths, assuming they progress as planned. This change would cause
path C-G-I-J to become the new critical path. Therefore, the critical path can change on a
project.
Using Critical Path Analysis to Make Schedule Trade-Offs
It is important to know the critical path throughout the life of a project so the project
manager can make trade-offs. If a task on the critical path is behind schedule, the project
manager must be aware of the problem and decide what to do about it. Should the schedule
be renegotiated with stakeholders? Should more resources be allocated to other items on
the critical path to make up for that time? Is it acceptable for the project to finish behind
schedule? By keeping track of the critical path, the project manager and the team take a
proactive role in managing the project schedule.
A technique that can help project managers make schedule trade-offs is determining
the free slack and total slack for each project activity. Free slack or free float is the amount
of time an activity can be delayed without delaying the early start date of any immediately
following activities. The early start date is the earliest possible time an activity can start
based on the project network logic. Total slack or total float is the amount of time an
activity can be delayed from its early start without delaying the planned project finish date.
Chapter 6
262
Project managers calculate free slack and total slack by doing a forward and
backward pass through a network diagram. A forward pass determines the early start
and early finish dates for each activity. The early finish date is the earliest possible
time an activity can finish based on the project network logic. The project start date is
equal to the early start date for the first network diagram activity. The early start plus
the duration of the first activity is equal to the early finish date of the first activity. It
is also equal to the early start date of each subsequent activity unless an activity has
multiple predecessors. When an activity has multiple predecessors, its early start date
is the latest of the early finish dates of those predecessors. For example, Tasks D and
E immediately precede Task H in Figure 6-8. The early start date for Task H, therefore,
is the early finish date of Task E, because it occurs later than the early finish date of
Task D. A backward pass through the network diagram determines the late start and
late finish dates for each activity in a similar fashion. The late start date is the latest
possible time an activity might begin without delaying the project finish date. The late
finish date is the latest possible time an activity can be completed without delaying the
project finish date.
Project managers can determine the early and late start and finish dates of each
activity by hand. For example, Figure 6-9 shows a simple network diagram with three
tasks, A, B, and C. Tasks A and B both precede Task C. Assume that all duration estimates
are in days. Task A has an estimated duration of 5 days, Task B has an estimated duration
of 10 days, and Task C has an estimated duration of 7 days. There are only two paths
Figure 6-9  Calculating early and late start and finish dates
ES = early start
EF = early ﬁnish
LS = late start
LF = late ﬁnish
ES
EF
LS
LF
Legend:
0
5
5
10
A = 5
0
0
0
0
Start
0
10
0
10
B = 10
10
17
10
17
C = 7
Project Schedule Management
263
Task
Name
Start
Finish
Late Start
Late Finish
Free Slack
Total Slack
A
3/26/2018
3/26/2018
3/28/2018
3/29/2018
0d
2d
B
3/26/2018
3/27/2018
3/26/2018
3/28/2018
0d
0d
C
3/26/2018
3/28/2018
3/28/2018
4/2/2018
0d
2d
D
3/27/2018
3/30/2018
3/29/2018
4/4/2018
2d
2d
E
3/28/2018
4/3/2018
3/28/2018
4/4/2018
0d
0d
F
3/28/2018
4/2/2018
4/6/2018
4/12/2018
7d
7d
G
3/29/2018
4/5/2018
4/2/2018
4/10/2018
0d
2d
H
4/4/2018
4/11/2018
4/4/2018
4/12/2018
0d
0d
I
4/6/2018
4/9/2018
4/10/2018
4/12/2018
2d
2d
J
4/12/2018
4/16/2018
4/12/2018
4/16/2018
0d
0d
Table 6-1  Free and total float or slack for project X
through this small network diagram: Path A-C has a duration of 12 days (5 1 7), and path
B-C has a duration of 17 days (10 1 7). Because path B-C is longer, it is the critical path.
There is no float or slack on this path, so the early and late start and finish dates are the
same. However, Task A has 5 days of float or slack. Its early start date is day 0, and its late
start date is day 5. Its early finish date is day 5, and its late finish date is day 10. Both the
free and total float amounts for Task A are 5 days.
Using project management software is a much faster and easier way to determine early
and late start and finish dates and free and total slack amounts for activities. Table 6-1
shows the free and total slack for all activities on the network diagram for Project X using
the data from Figure 6-8 and assuming that Tasks A, B, and C started on March 26, 2018.
(The network diagram is shown in Figure 6-4, which was created with Microsoft Project.)
The data in this table was created by selecting the Schedule Table view in Microsoft
Project.
Knowing the amount of float or slack allows project managers to know whether the
schedule is flexible and how flexible it might be. For example, at 7 days (7d), Task F has
the most free and total slack. The most slack on any other activity is only 2 days (2d).
Understanding how to create and use slack information provides a basis for negotiating
project schedules. See the Help information in Microsoft Project or research other
resources for more detailed information on calculating slack.
Using the Critical Path to Shorten a Project Schedule
It is common for stakeholders to want to shorten a project schedule estimate. A project
team may have done its best to develop a project schedule by defining activities,
determining sequencing, and estimating resources and durations for each activity. The
Chapter 6
264
results of this work may have shown that the project team needs 10 months to complete
the project, but the sponsor might ask if the project can be done in eight or nine months.
(Rarely do people ask the project team to take longer than suggested.) By knowing the
critical path, the project manager and the team can use several duration compression
techniques to shorten the project schedule. One technique is to reduce the duration of
activities on the critical path. The project manager can shorten the duration of critical-
path activities by allocating more resources to those activities or by changing their scope.
Several experts suggest that it is extremely difficult to shorten a reasonable project
schedule by more than 25 percent.
Recall that Sue Johnson in the opening case was having schedule problems with
the online registration project because several users missed important project review
meetings and one of the senior programmers quit. If Sue and her team created a realistic
project schedule, produced accurate duration estimates, and established dependencies
between tasks, they could analyze their status in terms of meeting the May 1 deadline.
If some activities on the critical path had already slipped and they did not build in extra
time at the end of the project, then they would have to take corrective actions to finish
the project on time. Sue could request that her company or the college provide more
people to work on the project in an effort to make up time. She could also request that the
scope of activities be reduced to complete the project on time. Sue could also use project
schedule management techniques, such as crashing or fast tracking, to shorten the project
schedule.
Crashing is a technique for making cost and schedule trade-offs to obtain the greatest
amount of schedule compression for the least incremental cost. For example, suppose
that one of the items on the critical path for the online registration project was entering
course data for the new semester into the new system. If this task has not yet been done
and was originally estimated to take two weeks based on the college providing a part-
time data entry clerk, Sue could suggest that the college have the clerk work full time to
finish the task in one week instead of two. This change would not cost Sue's company
more money, and it could shorten the project end date by one week. If the college could
not meet this request, Sue could consider hiring a temporary data entry person for one
week to help get the task done faster. By focusing on tasks on the critical path that could
be done more quickly for no extra cost or a small cost, the project schedule can be
shortened.
The main advantage of crashing is shortening the time needed to finish a project. The
main disadvantage of crashing is that it often increases total project costs. You will learn
more about project costs in Chapter 7, Project Cost Management.
Another technique for shortening a project schedule is fast tracking. Fast tracking
involves doing activities in parallel that you would normally do in sequence. For
example, Sue Johnson's project team may have planned not to start any of the coding
for the online registration system until all of the analysis was done. Instead, they could
consider starting some coding activity before the analysis is completed. The main
advantage of fast tracking, like crashing, is that it can shorten the time needed to finish
a project. The main disadvantage is that it can increase cost and actually lengthen the
project schedule because starting some tasks too soon often increases project risk and
results in rework.
Project Schedule Management
265
Importance of Updating Critical Path Data
In addition to finding the critical path at the beginning of a project, it is important to
update the schedule with actual data. After the project team completes activities, the
project manager should document the actual durations of those activities. The project
manager should also document revised estimates for activities in progress or yet to be
started. These revisions often cause a project's critical path to change, resulting in a new
estimated completion date for the project. Again, proactive project managers and their
teams stay on top of changes so they can make informed decisions and keep stakeholders
involved in major project decisions.
Critical Chain Scheduling
Another technique that addresses the challenge of meeting or beating project finish
dates is an application of the Theory of Constraints called critical chain scheduling.
The Theory of Constraints (TOC) is a management philosophy developed by Eliyahu
M. Goldratt and discussed in his books The Goal and Critical Chain. The Theory of
Constraints is based on the metaphor of a chain and its weakest link: Any complex
system at any point in time often has only one aspect or constraint that limits the
ability to achieve more of the system's goal. For the system to attain any significant
improvements, that constraint must be identified, and the whole system must be
managed with it in mind. Critical chain scheduling is a method that considers limited
resources when creating a project schedule and includes buffers to protect the project
completion date.
An important concept in critical chain scheduling is the availability of scarce
resources. Some projects cannot be done unless a particular resource is available to
work on one or several tasks. For example, if a television network wants to produce a
show centered around a particular celebrity, it must first check the availability of that
celebrity. As another example, if a particular piece of equipment is needed full time to
complete each of two tasks that were originally planned to occur simultaneously, critical
chain scheduling acknowledges that you must either delay one of those tasks until the
equipment is available or find another piece of equipment in order to meet the schedule.
Other important concepts related to critical chain scheduling include multitasking and
time buffers.
Although many people are proud to say they are good at multitasking, multitasking
is not a good thing to do if you want to finish a project in a timely manner. Multitasking
occurs when a resource works on more than one task at a time. This situation occurs
frequently on projects. People are assigned to multiple tasks within the same project or
different tasks on multiple projects. For example, suppose someone is working on three
different tasks-Task 1, Task 2, and Task 3-for three different projects, and each task
takes 10 days to complete. If the person did not multitask, and instead completed each
task sequentially starting with Task 1, then Task 1 would be completed after day 10, Task 2
would be completed after day 20, and Task 3 would be completed after day 30, as shown in
Figure 6-10a. However, because many people in this situation try to please all three parties
who need their tasks completed, they often work on the first task for some time, then the
second, then the third, then go back to the first task, and so on, as shown in Figure 6-10b.
Chapter 6
266
In this example, the tasks were all half-done one at a time, then completed one at a time.
Task 1 is now completed at the end of day 20 instead of day 10, Task 2 is completed at
the end of day 25 instead of day 20, and Task 3 is still completed on day 30. This example
illustrates how multitasking can delay task completion. Multitasking also often involves
wasted setup time, which increases total duration.
Critical chain scheduling assumes that resources do not multitask or at least
minimize multitasking. Someone should not be assigned to two tasks simultaneously
on the same project when critical chain scheduling is in effect. Likewise, critical chain
theory suggests that projects be prioritized so that people who are working on more
than one project at a time know which tasks take priority. Preventing multitasking
avoids resource conflicts and wasted setup time caused by shifting between multiple
tasks over time.
An essential concept to improving project finish dates with critical chain
scheduling is to change the way people make task estimates. Many people add a safety
or buffer-additional time to complete a task-to an estimate to account for various
factors. These factors include the negative effects of multitasking, distractions, and
interruptions, fear that estimates will be reduced, and Murphy's Law. Murphy's Law
states that if something can go wrong, it will. Critical chain scheduling removes buffers
from individual tasks and instead creates a project buffer, which is time added before
Task 1 completed
after 10 days
Task 1
Task 2
Task 3
10 days
10 days
10 days
Without
multitasking
Task 2 completed
after 20 days
Task 3 completed
after 30 days
Figure 6-10a  Three tasks without multitasking
Task 1 completed
after 20 days
Task 1
Task 2
Task 3
5 days
With
multitasking
after 25 days
Task 1
Task 2
Task 3
5 days
5 days
5 days
5 days
5 days
Task 3 completed
after 30 days
Task 2 completed
Figure 6-10b  Three tasks with multitasking
Project Schedule Management
267
Figure 6-11  Example of critical chain scheduling8
FB
X
X
FB
X
Completion
date
Project
buffer
Critical chain
Critical chain
X = Tasks done by limited resource
FB = Feeding buffer
Critical chain
FB
Source: Eliyahu Goldratt, Critical Chain
the project's due date. Critical chain scheduling also protects tasks on the critical
chain from being delayed by using feeding buffers, which consist of time added before
tasks on the critical chain if they are preceded by other tasks that are not on the
critical path.
Figure 6-11 provides an example of a network diagram constructed using critical
chain scheduling. Note that the critical chain accounts for a limited resource, X,
and the schedule includes use of feeding buffers and a project buffer in the network
diagram. The tasks marked with an X are part of the critical chain, which can be
interpreted as being the critical path using this technique. The task estimates in
critical chain scheduling should be shorter than traditional estimates because they do
not include their own buffers. Not having task buffers should mean fewer occurrences
of Parkinson's Law, which states that work expands to fill the time allowed. The
feeding and project buffers protect the date that really needs to be met-the project
completion date.
Several organizations have reported successes with critical chain scheduling. For
example, the What Went Right? feature shows how the healthcare industry is learning to
think differently by using the Theory of Constraints.
As you can see, critical chain scheduling is a fairly complicated yet powerful tool that
involves critical path analysis, resource constraints, and changes in how buffers are used
as part of task estimates. Some people consider critical chain scheduling one of the most
important new concepts in the field of project management.
Chapter 6
268
Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT)
When there is a high degree of uncertainty about the individual activity duration
estimates, the network analysis Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) can
be used to estimate project duration. PERT applies the critical path method (CPM) to a
weighted average duration estimate. This approach was developed at about the same time
as CPM, in the late 1950s, and it also uses network diagrams, which are still sometimes
referred to as PERT charts.
PERT uses probabilistic time estimates-duration estimates based on using
optimistic, most likely, and pessimistic estimates of activity durations-instead of one
specific or discrete duration estimate, as CPM does. To use PERT, you calculate a weighted
average for the duration estimate of each project activity using the following formula:
5
1
1
PERT weight average
optimistic time
4 * most likely time
pessimistic time
6
W h a t W e n t R i g h t ?
Experts in healthcare quality management have thought carefully about how scheduling
works at a doctor's office or healthcare clinic and have considered how it might be improved:
Consider a relatively simple system of a physician's office or clinic. The steps in the
process could be patients checking in, filling out forms, having vital signs taken by a
nurse, seeing the physician, seeing the nurse for a prescribed procedure such as vac-
cination, and so forth. These steps could take place in a simple linear sequence or
chain. . . . Each link in this chain has the ability to perform its tasks at different aver-
age rates. In this example, the first resource can process 13 patients, charts, or blood
samples per hour; the second can process 17, and so forth. One may think that this
process can produce 13 per hour, the average of all resources. In fact, this process or
chain only can produce an average of eight per hour. The chain is only as strong as its
weakest link and the rate of the slowest resource in this example, the weakest link, is
eight. This is true regardless of how fast each of the other resources can process indi-
vidually, how much work is stuffed into the pipeline, or how complex the process or
set of interconnected processes is to complete. Moreover, improving the performance
of any link besides the constraint does nothing to improve the system as a whole.9
In fact, the Avraham Y. Goldratt Institute (www.goldratt.com) applied this think-
ing at a client's site and showed just how well critical chain scheduling can work. The
National University Hospital in Singapore decreased patient admission times by more
than 50 percent. Improved scheduling lowered average wait times, which went from six
to eight hours to less than three hours. By applying critical chain techniques, the hospi-
tal admitted 63 percent of patients in less than 1.5 hours. Although these times still seem
long, they show significant improvement.10
Project Schedule Management
269
By using the PERT weighted average for each activity duration estimate, the total
project duration estimate takes into account the risk or uncertainty in the individual
activity estimates. Note that the above formula assumes a normal distribution or bell
curve. You can also use other distributions. Consult other sources for more details.
Suppose that Sue Johnson's project team in the opening case used PERT to
determine the schedule for the online registration system project. The team would have
to collect numbers for the optimistic, most likely, and pessimistic duration estimates for
each project activity. Suppose that one of the activities was to design an input screen
for the system. Someone might estimate that it would take about two weeks or 10
workdays to do this activity. Without using PERT, the duration estimate for that activity
would be 10 workdays. Using PERT, the project team would also need to estimate the
pessimistic and optimistic times for completing this activity. Suppose an optimistic
estimate is that the input screen can be designed in eight workdays, and a pessimistic
time estimate is 24 workdays. Applying the PERT formula, you get the following:
5
1
1
5
PERT weight average
optimistic time
4 * most likely time
pessimistic time
6
12 workdays
Instead of using the most likely duration estimate of 10 workdays, the project team
would use 12 workdays when doing critical path analysis. These additional two days could
help the project team get the work completed on time.
The main advantage of PERT is that it attempts to address the risk associated with
duration estimates. Because many projects exceed schedule estimates, PERT may help
in developing schedules that are more realistic. PERT's main disadvantages are that it
involves more work than CPM because it requires several duration estimates, and there
are better probabilistic methods for assessing schedule risk. (See the information on
Monte Carlo simulations in Chapter 11, Project Risk Management.)
Agile and Schedule Management
Recall from Chapter 2 that two of the core values of the Manifesto for Agile Software
Development are "customer collaboration over contract negotiation" and "responding to
change over following a plan." These values seem to contradict some of the structured
project schedule management processes and tools described in this chapter. Agile
methods like Scrum were designed to address collaboration and flexibility, especially
on projects with a complex scope of work. For example, the product owner defines and
prioritizes the work to be done within a sprint, so customer collaboration is designed
into the process. The short period of each sprint (normally two to four weeks) and daily
Scrum meetings provide an environment where team members collaborate to focus on
completing specific tasks.
An adaptive or agile approach can be used on large projects, even after they are
started using a more prescriptive approach. For example, the FBI says that switching to an
agile approach is what helped them complete the Sentinel project described in the What
Chapter 6
270
Went Wrong? feature earlier in the chapter. The system went live "thanks to the fact that
it was rescued by following an agile software development methodology. . . . The primary
lesson? Agile actually works. It's not perfect, and many people in government and in the
contractor community still struggle with it, but it's succeeding where it counts-enabling
the rollout of large-scale IT projects that are on time, on budget and actually do what
stakeholders want them to do. Imagine that."11
How was project schedule management different after moving to an agile approach?
After changing to a Scrum method in 2010, the work for the Sentinel project was
organized into user stories based on the original systems requirements specifications.
Each user story was allocated a number of story points based on difficulty. At the
beginning of each two-week sprint, the development team identified which user stories
to do during each sprint. At the end of each sprint the team demonstrated the system,
regardless of whether all of the work was completed, but only the user stories that passed
tests (approved by the customers) were reported as complete. If user stories were not
complete, they were moved to the product backlog. This approach helped the team focus
on delivering a working system that met customer needs in a specified timeframe. In other
words, the emphasis was on completing some useful work for the customer in short time
increments versus trying to define all the work required first and then scheduling when it
could be done.12
Controlling the Schedule
The final process in project schedule management is controlling the schedule. Like
scope control, schedule control is a portion of the integrated change control process in
project integration management. The goal of schedule control is to know the status of the
schedule, influence the factors that cause schedule changes, determine that the schedule
has changed, and manage changes when they occur.
The main inputs to schedule control are the project management plan, project
documents (like the lessons-learned register, project calendars, project schedule, resource
calendars, and schedule data), work performance data, and organizational process assets.
Some of the tools and techniques include the following:

Data analysis tools, including

Earned value analysis, described in detail in Chapter 7, Project Cost
Management

Iteration burndown charts, as described in Chapter 3

Performance reviews

Trend analysis

Variance analysis

What-if-scenario analysis

Critical path method, described earlier in this chapter

Project management information systems

Resource optimization, such as resource leveling, described in Chapter 9,
Project Resource Management
Project Schedule Management
271

Leads and lags, described earlier

Schedule compression, such as crashing and fast tracking
The main outputs of schedule control include work performance information,
schedule forecasts, change requests, project management plan updates, and project
documents updates.
Many issues are involved in controlling changes to project schedules. It is important
first to ensure that the project schedule is realistic. Many projects, especially in IT, have
very unrealistic schedule expectations. It is also important to use discipline and leadership
to emphasize the importance of following and meeting project schedules. Although the
various tools and techniques assist in developing and managing project schedules, project
managers must handle several personnel-related issues to keep projects on track. "Most
projects fail because of people issues, not from failure to draw a good PERT chart."13
Project managers can perform a number of reality checks that will help them manage
changes to project schedules. Several soft skills can help project managers to control
schedule changes.
Reality Checks on Scheduling and the Need for Discipline
It is important for projects to have realistic schedule goals and for project managers to
use discipline to help meet those goals. One of a project manager's first reality checks is
to review the draft schedule that is usually included in the project charter. Although this
draft schedule might include only a project start and end date, the project charter sets
some initial schedule expectations for the project. Next, the project manager and project
team should prepare a more detailed schedule and get stakeholders' approval. To establish
the schedule, it is critical to get involvement and commitment from all project team
members, top management, the customer, and other key stakeholders.
Another type of reality check comes from progress meetings with stakeholders.
The project manager is responsible for keeping the project on track, and key
stakeholders like to stay informed, often through high-level periodic reviews. Project
managers often illustrate progress with a Tracking Gantt chart that shows key
deliverables and activities. The project manager needs to understand the schedule,
including why activities are or are not on track, and take a proactive approach to
meeting stakeholder expectations. It is also important to verify schedule progress, as
Sue Johnson from the opening case discovered (see the Case Wrap-Up later in this
chapter). Just because a team member says a task was completed on time does not
always mean that it was. Project managers must review the actual work and develop a
good relationship with team members to ensure that work is completed as planned or
changes are reported as needed.
Top management hates surprises, so the project manager must be clear and honest in
communicating project status. By no means should project managers create the illusion
that the project is going fine when it is actually having serious problems. When serious
conflicts arise that could affect the project schedule, the project manager must alert top
management and work with them to resolve the conflicts.
Chapter 6
272
Project managers must also use discipline to control project schedules. Several IT
project managers have discovered that setting firm dates for key project milestones helps
minimize schedule changes. It is very easy for scope creep to raise its ugly head on IT
projects. Insisting that important schedule dates be met and that proper planning and
analysis be completed up front helps everyone focus on doing what is most important for
the project. This discipline results in meeting project schedules.
Using Software to Assist in Project Schedule
Management
Several types of software are available that assist with project schedule management.
Software for facilitating communications helps project managers exchange schedule-
related information with project stakeholders. Decision support models can help project
managers analyze various trade-offs that can be made to address schedule issues.
However, project management software was designed specifically for performing
project management tasks. You can use project management software to draw network
diagrams, determine the critical path for a project, create Gantt charts, and report, view,
and filter specific project schedule management information. For example, Figures 6-4,
6-5, 6-6, 6-7, and Table 6-1 were all created using Microsoft Project; Appendix A (available
on the Companion website for this text) shows many more examples of using this software
to assist in project schedule management.
Many projects involve hundreds of tasks with complicated dependencies. After you
enter the necessary information, project management software automatically generates a
network diagram and calculates the critical path(s) for the project. It also highlights the
critical path in red on the network diagram.
Project management software also calculates the free and total float or slack for
all activities. Using project management software eliminates the need to perform
cumbersome calculations manually and allows for "what if" analysis as activity duration
estimates or dependencies change. Recall that knowing which activities have the most
slack allows the project manager to reallocate resources or make other changes to
compress the schedule or help keep it on track.
Project 2016 easily creates Gantt charts and Tracking Gantt charts, which make
it easier for project teams to track actual schedule performance versus the planned or
baseline schedule. However, for a project to benefit from using Tracking Gantt charts,
actual schedule information must be entered in a timely manner. Some organizations use
e-mail or other communications software to send updated task and schedule information
to the person responsible for updating the schedule. He or she can then quickly authorize
these updates and enter them directly into the project management software. This process
provides an accurate and up-to-date project schedule in Gantt chart form.
Project 2016 also includes many built-in reports, views, and filters to assist in project
schedule management. For example, a project manager can quickly run a report to list all tasks
that are scheduled to start soon, and then send a reminder to the people responsible for these
tasks. A project manager who was presenting project schedule information to top management
could create a Gantt chart showing only summary tasks or milestones. You can also create
custom reports, views, tables, and filters. See Appendix A (available on the Companion website
for this text) to learn how to use the project schedule management features of Project 2016.
Project Schedule Management
273
Words of Caution on Using Project Management Software
Many people misuse project management software because they do not understand the
concepts behind creating a network diagram, determining the critical path, or setting
a schedule baseline. They might also rely too heavily on sample files or templates in
developing their own project schedules. Understanding the underlying concepts (or
even being able to work with the tools manually) is critical to successful use of project
management software, as is understanding the specific needs of your project.
Many top managers, including software professionals, have made blatant errors using
various versions of Microsoft Project and similar tools. For example, one top manager did
not know how to establish dependencies among project activities and entered every single
start and end date for hundreds of activities. When asked what would happen if the project
started a week or two late, she responded that she would have to reenter all of the dates.
This manager did not understand the importance of establishing relationships among
the tasks, which allows the software to update formulas automatically when the inputs
change. If the project start date slips by one week, the project management software will
update all the other dates automatically, as long as they are not manually entered into the
software. If one activity cannot start before another ends, and the first activity's actual
start date is two days late, the start date for the succeeding activity will automatically be
moved back two days. To achieve this type of functionality, tasks that have relationships
must be linked in project management software.
G l o b a l I s s u e s
Most software companies use case studies or customer testimonials to showcase how
their software helps customers solve business problems. Microsoft tells the customer
story of Mexico's Secretary of Economy, who wanted to ensure that IT initiatives aligned
with business goals and improved project management efficiency. Internal IT project
requests often took several weeks to fulfill because the organization lacked a centralized
method of capturing project information and used several diagramming tools.
The Director General of Information Technology decided to establish an Office of
Project Management and search for a solution that combined professional diagramming
capabilities with project management and collaboration tools. Assistant Director General of
the Office of Information Technology, Carlos Benítez Gonzales, worked with other agencies
to find the best solution. After deploying several of Microsoft's tools (Visio, Project, and
SharePoint), the organization was able to handle more internal IT projects without adding
staff, while fulfilling requests 60 percent faster.
"By documenting and incorporating governance procedures and project lifecycle
stages into a standardized workflow process, the Secretary's IT team can finish projects
in less time. Benítez estimates that it previously took an average of five business days
to fulfill requests. The team can now complete the same work in two business days on
average. . . . 'We now have a single platform for managing process information that used
to be scattered throughout the organization and inaccessible because it was stored on
local computers,' says Benítez. The IT team can now handle four times the number of
concurrent projects without the need to hire additional staff."14
Chapter 6
274
Another top manager on a large IT project did not know how to set a baseline in
Microsoft Project. He spent almost one day every week copying and pasting information
from Microsoft Project into a spreadsheet and using complicated "IF" statements to
figure out what activities were behind schedule. He had never received training on
Microsoft Project and did not know about many of its capabilities. To use any software
effectively, users must have adequate training in the software and an understanding of
its underlying concepts.
Many project management software programs also come with templates or sample
files. It is very easy to use these files without considering unique project needs. For
example, a project manager for a software development project can use the Microsoft
Project Software Development template file, the files from similar projects done in
the past, or sample files purchased from other companies. All of these files include
suggested tasks, durations, and relationships. There are benefits to using templates
or sample files, such as less setup time and a reality check if the project manager
has never led a certain type of project before. However, there are drawbacks to this
approach. Many assumptions made in these template files might not apply to the
project, such as a design phase that takes three months to complete or the performance
of certain types of testing. Project managers and their teams should be careful not to
rely too much on templates or sample files and ignore the unique concerns of their
particular projects.
Considerations for Agile/Adaptive Environments
The PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition provides the following information for project sched-
ule management:
Adaptive approaches use short cycles to undertake work, review the results, and adapt
as necessary. These cycles provide rapid feedback on the approaches and suitability of
deliverables, and generally manifest as iterative schedule and on-demand, pull-based
scheduling, as discussed in the section on Key Trends and Emerging Practices in Proj-
ect Schedule Management.
In large organizations, there may be a mixture of small projects and large initiatives
requiring long-term roadmaps to manage the development of these programs using
scaling factors (e.g., team size, geographical distribution, regulatory compliance,
organizational complexity, and technical complexity). To address the full delivery life
cycle for larger, enterprise-wide systems, a rage of techniques utilizing a predictive
approach, adaptive approach, or a hybrid of both may need to be adopted. The organi-
zation may need to combine practices from several core methods, or adopt a method
that has already done so, and adopt a few principles and practices of more traditional
techniques.
The role of the project manager does not change based on managing projects using
a predictive development life cycle of managing projects in adaptive environments.
However, to be successful in using adaptive approaches, the project manager will
need to be familiar with the tools and techniques to understand how to apply them
effectively.15
Project Schedule Management
275
C a s e W r a p - U p
It was now March 15, just a month and a half before the new online registration system
was supposed to go live. The project was in total chaos. Sue Johnson thought she could
handle all of the conflicts that kept occurring on the project, and she was too proud and
scared to admit to her top management or the college president that things were not
going well. She spent a lot of time preparing a detailed schedule for the project, and she
thought she was using the project management software well enough to keep up with
project status. However, the five main programmers on the project all figured out a way
to generate automatic updates for their tasks every week, saying that everything was
completed as planned. They paid very little attention to the actual plan and hated filling
out status information. Sue did not check most of their work to verify that it was actu-
ally completed. In addition, the head of the Registrar's Office was uninterested in the
project and delegated sign-off responsibility to one of his clerks, who did not completely
understand the registration process. When Sue and her team started testing the new
system, she learned they were using last year's course data, which caused additional
problems because the college was moving from quarters to semesters in the new term.
How could they have missed that requirement? Sue hung her head in shame and anguish
as she walked into a meeting with her manager to ask for help. She learned the hard
way how difficult it was to keep a project on track. She wished she had spent more time
talking face-to-face with key project stakeholders, especially her programmers and the
Registrar's Office representatives, to verify that the project was on schedule and that the
schedule was updated accurately.
Schedule management is radically different using Agile and Scrum in particular.
Projects that rely heavily on the critical path method consider meeting the project's
estimated completion date as a crucial component of success. Agile projects, on the other
hand, may not even need to estimate activity durations or project schedules at all. Why?
Because overall project completion time is not important. The customer/product owners
are empowered to demand what they want in each and every short iteration (in the
product backlog), and they get to see and touch a working product, and approve of it,
by the end of each iteration. Customer satisfaction and project progress are extremely
transparent at each iteration.
Project schedule management is challenging for all types of projects. This chapter
highlights important concepts, processes, and tools and techniques in this knowledge area.
Chapter 6
276
Chapter Summary
Project schedule management is often cited as the main source of conflict on projects. Most IT
projects exceed time estimates. The main processes involved in project schedule management
include planning schedule management, defining activities, sequencing activities, estimating
activity durations, developing the schedule, and controlling the schedule.
Planning schedule management involves determining the policies, procedures, and
documentation that will be used for planning, executing, and controlling the project schedule.
The main output is a schedule management plan.
Defining activities involves identifying the specific activities that must be completed to
produce the project deliverables. It usually results in a more detailed WBS.
Sequencing activities determines the relationships or dependencies between activities.
Three reasons for creating relationships are that they are mandatory based on the nature of the
work, discretionary based on the project team's experience, or external based on non-project
activities. Activity sequencing must be done in order to use critical path analysis.
Network diagrams are the preferred technique for showing activity sequencing. The two
methods used to create these diagrams are the arrow diagramming method and the precedence
diagramming method. There are four types of relationships between tasks: finish-to-start,
finish-to-finish, start-to-start, and start-to-finish.
Estimating activity durations creates estimates for the amount of time it will take to
complete each activity. These time estimates include the actual amount of time worked plus
elapsed time.
Developing the schedule uses results from all of the other project schedule management
processes to determine the start and end dates for the project. Project managers often use Gantt
charts to display the project schedule. Tracking Gantt charts show planned and actual schedule
information.
The critical path method predicts total project duration. The critical path for a project is the
series of activities that determines the earliest completion date for the project. It is the longest
path through a network diagram. If any activity on the critical path slips, the whole project will slip
unless the project manager takes corrective action.
Crashing and fast tracking are two techniques for shortening project schedules. Project
managers and their team members must be careful about accepting unreasonable schedules,
especially for IT projects. There is a practical limit to shortening schedules of about 25 percent,
and it almost always increases project cost and risk.
Critical chain scheduling is an application of the Theory of Constraints (TOC) that
uses critical path analysis, resource constraints, and buffers to help meet project
completion dates.
The Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) is a network analysis technique
used to estimate project duration when there is a high degree of uncertainty about the individual
activity duration estimates. PERT uses optimistic, most likely, and pessimistic estimates of
activity durations. PERT is seldom used today.
Project Schedule Management
277
Agile methods like Scrum take a different approach to project schedule management by
providing more flexibility. The short time period of each sprint (normally two to four weeks) and
daily Scrum meetings provide an environment where team members collaborate to focus on
completing specific tasks within that time period. The product owner identifies and prioritizes
tasks to be done during each sprint.
Controlling the schedule is the final process in project schedule management. Even though
scheduling techniques are very important, most projects fail because of personnel issues, not
from a poor network diagram. Project managers must involve all stakeholders in the schedule
development process. It is critical to set realistic project schedules and use discipline to meet
schedule goals.
Project management software can assist in project scheduling if used properly. With project
management software, you can avoid the need to perform cumbersome calculations manually
and perform "what if" analysis as activity duration estimates or dependencies change. Many
people misuse project management software because they do not understand the concepts
behind creating a network diagram, determining the critical path, or setting a schedule baseline.
Project managers must also avoid relying too much on sample files or templates when creating
their unique project schedules.
Be sure to consider how project schedule management can differ in agile/adaptive
environments.
Discussion Questions
1. Why do you think schedule issues often cause the most conflicts on projects?
2. Why is defining activities a process of project schedule management instead of project
scope management?
3. Why is it important to determine activity sequencing on projects? Discuss diagrams
you have seen that are similar to network diagrams. Describe their similarities and
differences.
4. Explain the difference between estimating activity durations and estimating the effort
required to perform an activity.
5. Explain the following schedule development tools and concepts: Gantt charts, critical path
method, PERT, critical chain scheduling, and sprints.
6. What do you think about adding slack to individual task estimates (sometimes called
padding estimates)? What do you think about adding a project buffer for the entire project,
as critical chain scheduling suggests? What are some ethical considerations when using
slack and buffers?
7. How can you minimize or control changes to project schedules?
8. List some of the reports you can generate with Project 2016 to assist with project schedule
management.
9. Why is it difficult to use project management software well?
10. How is schedule management different when using an agile approach?
Chapter 6
278
Quick Quiz
1. Which of the following processes involves determining the policies, procedures, and
documentation that will be used for planning, executing, and controlling the project
schedule?
a.
Planning schedule management
b.
Defining activities
c.
Estimating activity resources
d.
Activity sequencing
2. Predecessors, successors, logical relationships, leads and lags, resource requirements,
constraints, imposed dates, and assumptions are all examples of
.
a.
items in an activity list
b.
items on a Gantt chart
c.
milestone attributes
d.
activity attributes
3. As the project manager for a software development project, you are helping to develop the
project schedule. You decide that writing code for a system should not start until users sign
off on the analysis work. What type of dependency is this?
a.
Technical
b.
Mandatory
c.
Discretionary
d.
External
4. You cannot start editing a technical report until someone else completes the first draft. What
type of dependency does this represent?
a.
Finish-to-start
b.
Start-to-start
c.
Finish-to-finish
d.
Start-to-finish
5. Which of the following statements is false?
a.
A burndown chart is a tool for schedule control.
b.
Duration and effort are synonymous terms.
c.
A three-point estimate includes an optimistic, a most likely, and a pessimistic estimate.
d.
A Gantt chart is a common tool for displaying project schedule information.
6. What symbol on a Gantt chart represents a slipped milestone?
a.
A black arrow
b.
A white arrow
c.
A black diamond
d.
A white diamond
Project Schedule Management
279
7. What type of diagram shows planned and actual project schedule information?
a.
A network diagram
b.
A Gantt chart
c.
A Tracking Gantt chart
d.
A milestone chart
8.
is a network diagramming technique used to predict total project duration.
a.
PERT
b.
A Gantt chart
c.
Critical path method
d.
Crashing
9. Which of the following statements is false?
a.
Growing grass was on the critical path for a large theme park project.
b.
The critical path is the series of activities that determine the earliest time by which a
project can be completed.
c.
A forward pass through a project network diagram determines the early start and early
finish dates for each activity.
d.
Fast tracking is a technique for making cost and schedule trade-offs to obtain the
greatest amount of schedule compression for the least incremental cost.
10.
is a method of scheduling that considers limited resources when creating a
project schedule and includes buffers to protect the project completion date.
a.
Parkinson's Law
b.
Scrum
c.
Critical path analysis
d.
Critical chain scheduling
Quick Quiz Answers
1. a; 2. d; 3. c; 4. a; 5. b; 6. d; 7. c; 8. c; 9. d; 10. d
Exercises
1. Using Figure 6-2, enter the activities, their durations (in days), and their relationships in Project
2016. Use a project start date of March 26, 2018 if you want the dates to match exactly. View
the network diagram. Does it look like Figure 6-4? Print the network diagram on one page.
Return to the Gantt chart view. To re-create Table 6-1, right-click the Select All button to the left
of the Task Mode column heading and select Schedule. Alternatively, you can click the View
tab and click the Tables button under the Data group and then select Schedule. You may need
to move the split bar to the right to reveal all of the table columns. (See Appendix A-available
on the Companion website for this text-for detailed information on using Project 2016.)
Write a few paragraphs explaining what the network diagram and schedule table show about
Project X's schedule.
Chapter 6
280
2. Consider Table 6-2. All duration estimates or estimated times are in days, and the network
proceeds from Node 1 to Node 9. (Note that you can easily change this table to create
multiple exercises.)
Activity
Initial Node
Final Node
Estimated Duration
A
1
2
2
B
2
3
2
C
2
4
3
D
2
5
4
E
3
6
2
F
4
6
3
G
5
7
6
H
6
8
2
I
6
7
5
J
7
8
1
K
8
9
2
Table 6-2  Network diagram data for a small project
a. Draw an AOA network diagram representing the project. Put the node numbers in circles
and draw arrows from node to node, labeling each arrow with the activity letter and
estimated time.
b. Identify all of the paths on the network diagram and note how long they are, using Figure 6-8
as a guide for how to represent each path.
c. What is the critical path for this project and how long is it?
d. What is the shortest possible time needed to complete this project?
3. Consider Table 6-3. All duration estimates or estimated times are in weeks, and the network
proceeds from Node 1 to Node 8. (Note that you can easily change this table to create
multiple exercises.)
a. Draw an AOA network diagram representing the project. Put the node numbers in circles
and draw arrows from node to node, labeling each arrow with the activity letter and
estimated time.
b. Identify all of the paths on the network diagram and note how long they are, using Figure 6-8
as a guide for how to represent each path.
c. What is the critical path for this project and how long is it?
d. What is the shortest possible time needed to complete this project?
Project Schedule Management
281
4. Enter the information from Exercise 2 into Project 2016. View the network diagram and task
schedule table to see the critical path and float or slack for each activity. Print the Gantt
chart and network diagram views and the task schedule table. Write a short paper that
interprets this information for someone unfamiliar with project schedule management.
5. Enter the information from Exercise 3 into Project 2016. View the network diagram and task
schedule table to see the critical path and float or slack for each activity. Print the Gantt
chart and network diagram views and the task schedule table. Write a short paper that
interprets this information for someone unfamiliar with project schedule management.
6. Create a scenario and schedule for a 6-month or 12-month project. Include the five
process groups, but focus on key tasks for executing the project. For example, you could
develop a schedule for starting a business, renovating a house, developing an app,
or writing a book. Give only your scenario information to a classmate to work on, and
compare the results. Create a schedule based on your classmate's scenario. Write a short
paper summarizing the similarities and differences in what each of you created and the
challenges you faced.
7. Find at least three different sample schedules created in Microsoft Project, MindView, or other
project management software. Analyze the schedules, focusing on how complete the task lists
are, how realistic the durations are, whether dependencies are included, and so on. Document
your results in a short paper, including screenshots of the schedules and references.
8. Interview someone who uses some of the techniques discussed in this chapter. How does
the person feel about network diagrams, critical path analysis, Gantt charts, critical chain
Activity
Initial Node
Final Node
Estimated Duration
A
1
2
10
B
1
3
12
C
1
4
8
D
2
3
4
E
2
5
8
F
3
4
6
G
4
5
4
H
4
6
8
I
5
6
6
J
5
8
12
K
6
7
8
L
7
8
10
Table 6-3  Network diagram data for a large project
Chapter 6
282
scheduling, Scrum, using project management software, and managing the personnel issues
involved in project schedule management? Write a short paper describing the responses.
9. Review two different articles about critical chain scheduling. Write a short paper describing
how this technique can help improve project schedule management.
10. Search for videos that explain how and why you would want to find the critical path for
a project. Write a short paper describing your findings. Summarize the best two videos;
provide screenshots and explain why you liked the videos. (Note: Instructors can change the
topic from critical path to other concepts in this chapter as well.)
11. Research how schedule management is performed on agile projects. Summarize your
findings in a short paper or presentation.
Running Case
You are the project manager for the Global Treps Project, sponsored by Dr. K. Team members
include Bobby, your IT guy; Kim, a new college grad now working for a non profit group in
Vietnam; Ashok, a business student in India; and Alfreda, a student in the United States originally
from Ethiopia. You plan to outsource some of the work (e.g., purchasing laptops, developing a
website feature for accepting donations, and creating videos for the website). Recall that your
schedule and cost goals are to complete the project in six months for under $120,000.
Tasks
1. Review the WBS and Gantt chart you created for Tasks 3 and 4 in Chapter 5. Propose three
to five additional activities that would help you estimate resources and durations. Write a
one-page paper describing these new activities.
2. Identify at least five milestones for the Global Treps Project. Write a short paper describing
each milestone using the SMART criteria. Discuss how determining the details of these
milestones might add activities or tasks to the Gantt chart. Remember that milestones
normally have no duration, so you must have tasks that will lead to completing them.
3. Using the Gantt chart you created for Task 4 in Chapter 5 and the new activities and
milestones you proposed in Tasks 1 and 2 above, create a new Gantt chart using Project
2016 or another tool. Estimate the task durations and enter dependencies as appropriate.
Remember that your schedule goal for the project is six months. Print the Gantt chart and
network diagram, each on one page.
Key Terms
activity
activity attributes
activity list
activity-on-arrow (AOA)
arrow diagramming method (ADM)
backward pass
baseline dates
buffer
Project Schedule Management
283
burst
crashing
critical chain scheduling
critical path
critical path method (CPM) or critical
path analysis
dependency
discretionary dependencies
dummy activities
duration
early finish date
early start date
effort
external dependencies
fast tracking
feeding buffers
finish-to-finish dependency
finish-to-start dependency
float
forward pass
free slack (free float)
Gantt chart
internal dependencies
late finish date
late start date
mandatory dependencies
merge
milestone
multitasking
Murphy's Law
network diagram
node
Parkinson's Law
PERT weighted average
precedence diagramming
method (PDM)
probabilistic time estimates
Program Evaluation and Review
Technique (PERT)
project buffer
project schedule management
relationship
resource breakdown structure
resources
schedule baseline
slack
slipped milestone
SMART criteria
start-to-finish dependency
start-to-start dependency
task
Theory of Constraints (TOC)
three-point estimate
total slack (total float)
Tracking Gantt chart
Endnotes

1 Fran Kelly, "The World Today-Olympic planning schedule behind time," ABC Online
(March 4, 2004).

2 Jay Weiner and Rachel Blount, "Olympics are safe but crowds are sparse," Minneapolis Star
Tribune (August 22, 2004), A9.

3 Martin Muller, "After Sochi 2014: Costs and Impacts of Russia's Olympic Games", Social
Science Research Network (February 2015).

4 Paul Roberts, "Frustrated contractor sentenced for hacking FBI to speed deployment,"
InfoWorld Tech Watch (July 6, 2006).
Chapter 6
284

5 Stephen Losey, "FBI to begin training employees on Sentinel case management system,"
www.federaltimes.com (April 26, 2007).

6 Jeff Stein, "FBI's Expensive Sentinel Computer System Still Isn't Working, Despite Report,"
Newsweek (September 24, 2014).

7 Shawn Achor, The Happiness Advantage (New York: Crown Business, 2010).

8 Eliyahu Goldratt, Critical Chain (Great Barrington, MA: The North River Press, 1997), p. 218.

9 Anne M. Breen, Tracey Burton-Houle, and David C. Aron, "Applying the Theory of
Constraints in Health Care: Part 1-The Philosophy," Quality Management in Health Care,
Volume 10, Number 3 (Spring 2002).

10 Avraham Y. Goldratt Institute (AGI), "A Sampling of Client Results" (www.goldratt.com/
resultsoverview) (accessed April 29, 2015).

11 Jason Bloomberg, "How the FBI Proves Agile Works for Government Agencies,"
www.cio.com (August 22, 2012).

12 Brian Wernham, "FBI Sentinel Programme Saved by Agile?," https://brianwernham
.wordpress.com/ (May 31, 2012).

13 Bart Bolton, "IS Leadership," Computerworld (May 19, 1997).

14 Microsoft, "Secretary of Economy of Mexico: Agency Uses Diagramming, Collaboration Tools
to Complete Projects 60 Percent Faster," Microsoft Customer Stories (November 19, 2014).

15 Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of
Knowledge (PMBOK Guide) - Sixth Edition (2017), Page 178.
C h a p t e r 7
Project Cost
Management
L e a r n i n g O b j e c t i v e s
After reading this chapter, you will be able to:

Develop a justification for project cost management and its importance in
achieving project success

Explain basic project cost management principles, concepts, and terms

Describe the process of planning cost management

Discuss different types of cost estimates and methods for preparing them

Using an example of an information technology (IT) project, list and
describe the processes of determining a budget and preparing a cost
estimate

Justify the use of earned value management and project portfolio
management to assist in cost control

Describe how project management software can assist in project cost
management

Discuss considerations for agile/adaptive environments
Chapter 7
286
The Importance of Project Cost Management
IT projects have a poor track record in meeting budget goals. A 2011 study published in
the Harvard Business Review examined IT change initiatives in almost 1,500 projects
and reported an average cost overrun of 27 percent. Cost overrun is the additional
percentage or dollar amount by which actual costs exceed estimates. The study was
considered the largest ever to analyze IT projects. The projects ranged from enterprise
resource planning to management information and customer relationship management
systems. Most projects incurred high expenses, with an average cost of $167 million; the
largest project cost $33 billion.1
The most important finding in the study, however, was the discovery of a large
number of gigantic overages when analyzing the project overrun data. One in six of
all projects studied contained a "black swan": a high-impact event that is rare and
unpredictable, but not improbable in retrospect. These IT black swan projects had an
average cost overrun of 200 percent and a schedule overrun of almost 70 percent. "This
highlights the true pitfall of IT change initiatives: It's not that they're particularly prone
O p e n i n g C a s e
Juan Gonzales was a systems analyst and network specialist for the waterworks department
of a major Mexican city. He enjoyed helping the city develop its infrastructure. His next
career objective was to become a project manager so he could have even more influence.
One of his colleagues invited him to attend an important project review meeting for
large government projects, including the Surveyor Pro project, in which Juan was most
interested. The Surveyor Pro project was a concept for developing a sophisticated
information system that included expert systems, object-oriented databases, and wireless
communications. The system would provide instant, graphical information to help
government surveyors do their jobs. For example, after a surveyor touched a map on the
screen of a handheld device, the system would prompt the surveyor to enter the type of
information needed for that area. This system would help in planning and implementing
many projects, from laying fiber-optic cable to installing water lines.
Juan was very surprised, however, that the majority of the meeting was spent
discussing cost-related issues. The government officials were reviewing many existing
projects to evaluate their performance and the potential impact on the government's
budget before discussing funding for any new projects. Juan did not understand many
of the terms and charts being presented. What was this "earned value" they kept
referring to? How were they estimating what it would cost to complete projects or how
long it would take? Juan thought he would learn more about the new technologies the
Surveyor Pro project would use, but he discovered that the cost estimates and projected
benefits were of most interest to the government officials at the meeting. It also seemed
that considerable effort would go toward detailed financial studies before any technical
work could even start. Juan wished he had taken some accounting and finance courses
so he could understand the acronyms and concepts people were discussing. Although
Juan had a degree in electrical engineering, he had no formal education in finance and
little experience with it. However, if Juan could understand information systems and
networks, he was confident that he could understand financial issues on projects as well.
He jotted down questions to discuss with his colleagues after the meeting.
Project Cost Management
287
What Is Cost?
A popular cost accounting textbook states, "Accountants usually define cost as a resource
sacrificed or foregone to achieve a specific objective."6 Webster's dictionary defines cost
as "something given up in exchange." Costs are often measured in monetary amounts,
such as dollars, that must be paid to acquire goods and services. (For convenience, the
examples in this chapter use dollars for monetary amounts.) Because projects cost money
and consume resources that could be used elsewhere, it is very important for project
managers to understand project cost management.
Many IT professionals, however, often react to cost overrun information with a smirk.
They know that many of the original cost estimates for IT projects are low or based on
unclear project requirements, so naturally there will be cost overruns. Not emphasizing
the importance of realistic project cost estimates from the outset is only one part of the
problem. In addition, many IT professionals think that preparing cost estimates is a job for
accountants. On the contrary, preparing good cost estimates is a demanding, important
skill that many professionals need to acquire, including project managers.
W h a t W e n t W r o n g ?
The United Kingdom's National Health Service (NHS) IT modernization program was
called "the greatest IT disaster in history" by one London columnist. This 10-year
program, which started in 2002, was created to provide an electronic patient records
system, appointment booking, and a prescription drug system in England and Wales.
Britain's Labor government estimates that the program will eventually cost more than
$55 billion, a $26 billion overrun. The program has been plagued by technical problems
due to incompatible systems, resistance from physicians who say they were not
adequately consulted about system features, and arguments among contractors about
who's responsible for what.3 A government audit in June 2006 found that the program,
one of the largest civilian IT projects undertaken worldwide, was progressing despite
high-profile problems. In an effort to reduce cost overruns, the NHS program would no
longer pay for products until delivery, shifting some financial responsibility to prime
contractors, including BT Group, Accenture, and Fujitsu Services.4 On September 22,
2011, government officials in the United Kingdom announced that they were scrapping
the National Programme for Health IT. Health Secretary Andrew Lansley said that the
program "let down the NHS and wasted taxpayers' money."5
to high cost overruns on average, as management consultants and academic studies
have previously suggested. It's that an unusually large proportion of them incur massive
overages-that is, there are a disproportionate number of black swans. By focusing on
averages instead of the more damaging outliers, most managers and consultants have been
missing the real problem."2
Obviously, IT projects have room for improvement in meeting cost goals. This chapter
describes important concepts in project cost management, particularly planning cost
management, creating good estimates, and using earned value management (EVM) to
assist in cost control.
Chapter 7
288
Another perceived reason for cost overruns is that many IT projects involve new
technology or business processes. Any new technology or business process is untested and
has inherent risks. Thus, costs grow and failures are to be expected, right? Wrong. Using
good project cost management can change this false perception.
What Is Project Cost Management?
Recall from Chapter 1 that the triple constraint of project management involves balancing
scope, schedule, and cost goals. Chapters 5 and 6 discuss project scope and schedule
management, and this chapter describes project cost management. Project cost management
includes the processes required to ensure that a project team completes a project within an
approved budget. Notice two crucial phrases in this definition: "a project" and "approved
budget." Project managers must make sure their projects are well defined, have accurate
schedule and cost estimates, and have a realistic budget that they were involved in approving.
It is the project manager's job to satisfy project stakeholders while continuously
striving to reduce and control costs. There are four processes for project cost management:
1. Planning cost management involves determining the policies, procedures,
and documentation that will be used for planning, executing, and controlling
project cost. The main output of this process is a cost management plan.
2. Estimating costs involves developing an approximation or estimate of the
costs of the resources needed to complete a project. The main outputs of the
cost estimating process are activity cost estimates, basis of estimates, and
project documents updates.
3. Determining the budget involves allocating the overall cost estimate to
individual work items to establish a baseline for measuring performance.
The main outputs of the cost budgeting process are a cost baseline, project
funding requirements, and project documents updates.
4. Controlling costs involves controlling changes to the project budget. The
main outputs of the cost control process are work performance information,
cost forecasts, change requests, and project management plan updates, and
project documents updates.
Figure 7-1 summarizes the inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of project cost
management.
To understand each of the project cost management processes, you must first
understand the basic principles of cost management. Many of these principles are not
unique to project management; however, project managers need to understand how these
principles relate to their specific projects.
Basic Principles of Cost Management
Many IT projects are never initiated because IT professionals do not know how to
develop a financial justification for them. Important concepts such as net present value
analysis, return on investment, and payback analysis were discussed in Chapter 4,
Project Integration Management. Likewise, many projects that are started never finish
because of cost management problems. Most members of an executive board have a
Project Cost Management
289
Source: PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition. Project Management Institute, Inc. (2017). Copyright and
all rights reserved. Material from this publication has been reproduced with permission of PMI.
Figure 7-1  Project cost management overview
7.1 Plan Cost
Management
7.4 Control Costs
.1 Inputs
.1 Project charter
.2 Project management plan
.3 Enterprise environmental
factors
.4 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Data analysis
.3 Meetings
.3 Outputs
.1 Cost management plan
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Project funding require-
ments
.4 Work performance data
.5 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Data analysis
.3 To-complete performance
index
.4 Project management
information system
.3 Outputs
.1 Work performance
information
.2 Cost forecasts
.3 Change requests
.4 Project management plan
updates
.5 Project documents updates
7.2 Estimate Costs
7.3 Determine Budget
Project Cost
Management Overview
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Business documents
.4 Agreements
.5 Enterprise environmental
factors
.6 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Cost aggregation
.3 Data analysis
.4 Historical information
review
.5 Funding limit reconciliation
.6 Financing
.3 Outputs
.1 Cost baseline
.2 Project funding require-
ments
.3 Project documents updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Enterprise environmental
factors
.4 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Analogous estimating
.3 Parametric estimating
.4 Bottom-up estimating
.5 Three-point estimating
.6 Data analysis
.7 Project management
information system
.8 Decision making
.3 Outputs
.1 Cost estimates
.2 Basis of estimates
.3 Project documents updates
Chapter 7
290
better understanding of financial terms than IT terms, and are more interested in finance.
Therefore, IT project managers need to be able to present and discuss project information
both in financial terms and technical terms. In addition to net present value analysis,
return on investment, and payback analysis, project managers must understand several
other cost management principles, concepts, and terms. This section describes general
topics such as profits, life cycle costing, cash flow analysis, tangible and intangible costs
and benefits, direct costs, sunk costs, learning curve theory, and reserves. Another
important topic-earned value management-is one of the key tools and techniques for
controlling project costs; it is described in detail in the section on cost control.
Profits are revenues minus expenditures. To increase profits, a company can increase
revenues, decrease expenses, or try to do both. Most executives are more concerned with
profits than with other issues. When justifying investments in new information systems
and technology, it is important to focus on the impact on profits, not just revenues or
expenses. Consider an e-commerce application that you estimate will increase revenues
for a $100 million company by 10 percent. You cannot measure the potential benefits of
the application without knowing the profit margin. Profit margin is the ratio of profits to
revenues. If revenues of $100 generate $2 in profits, there is a 2 percent profit margin. If
the company loses $2 for every $100 in revenue, there is a 22 percent profit margin.
Life cycle costing provides a big-picture view of the cost of a project throughout its
life cycle. This helps you develop an accurate projection of a project's financial costs and
benefits. Life cycle costing considers the total cost of ownership, or development plus
support costs, for a project. For example, a company might complete a project to develop
and implement a new customer service system in 1 or 2 years, but the new system could
be in place for 10 years. Project managers, with assistance from financial experts in their
organizations, should create estimates of the costs and benefits of the project for its entire
life cycle (10 years in the preceding example). Recall from Chapter 4 that the net present
value analysis for the project would include the entire 10-year period of costs and benefits.
Top management and project managers need to consider the life cycle costs of projects
when they make financial decisions.
M e d i a S n a p s h o t
A primary goal of many projects is to achieve some type of financial benefits, measured
using life cycle costing. Project success criteria often include reaching a certain return on
investment (ROI) over the life cycle. You cannot measure ROI for projects if you do not
have a benefits measurement process in place. How do you know if you earned or saved
a certain amount each year after the project was completed if you do not have a way to
measure it? According to a 2015 report by PMI:

Many organizations do not have a benefits measurement process at all.

Only twenty percent of organizations report having a high level of benefits real-
ization maturity.

Thirty-nine percent of high-performing organizations report high benefits
realization maturity compared to nine percent of low performers.
(continued)
Project Cost Management
291
Organizations have a history of not spending enough money in the early phases of
projects, which affects total cost of ownership. For example, it is much more cost-effective
to spend money on defining user requirements and doing early testing on IT projects than
to wait for problems to appear after implementation. Recall from Chapter 5 that correcting
a software defect late in a project costs much more than fixing the defect early.
Because organizations depend on reliable IT, huge costs are associated with downtime.

When Facebook was down for 20 minutes on September 3, 2014, they lost a
little more than $22,453 for every minute or more than $500,000.8

On August 19, 2013, Amazon.com went down for about 30 minutes, costing
them $66,240 per minute or nearly $2 million.9

For Fortune 1000 companies, the average cost of an infrastructure failure
is $100,000 per hour; the average cost of a critical application failure is
$500,000 to $1 million per hour, or $8,300 to $16,600 per minute.10

In 2014, the average annual cost of unplanned application downtime in
Fortune 1000 companies was $1.25 billion to $2.5 billion.11
W h a t W e n t R i g h t ?
An important cost-cutting strategy has been inspired by the global emphasis on
improving the environment. Investing in green IT and other initiatives has helped
both the environment and companies' bottom lines. Michael Dell, CEO of Dell, said he
aimed to make his company "carbon neutral" in 2008. "The computer giant is looking
to zero-out its carbon emissions through a number of initiatives, such as offering small
businesses and consumers curbside recycling of their old computers, stuffing small
recycling bags with free postage into new printer-ink cartridge boxes, and operating
a 'Plant a Tree for Me' program."12 Dell did reach his goal; as of March 2012, Dell had
helped its customers save almost $7 billion in energy costs.
Dell continues to practice corporate responsibility by helping the environment. In
2014, it reported the following progress:

Recovered 230.9 million pounds of used electronics and are on track to reach
our goal of 2 billion pounds by 2020

Reduced the average energy intensity of our product line by 23.2 percent com-
pared to FY12

Decreased operational emissions by 10 percent

Used more than 10 million pounds of post-consumer recycled plastics in our
products13
"Organizations with mature benefits realization processes can benefit from:

Clearly identifying the strategic rewards prior to starting a project

Effectively assessing and monitoring risks to project success

Proactively planning for making necessary changes in the organization

Explicitly defining accountability for project success

Routinely extending responsibility for integration to the project team."7
Chapter 7
292
Cash flow analysis is a method for determining the estimated annual costs and
benefits for a project and the resulting annual cash flow. Project managers must conduct
cash flow analysis to determine net present value. Most consumers understand the basic
concept of cash flow: If they do not have enough money in their wallets or bank accounts,
they cannot purchase something. Top management must consider cash flow concerns
when selecting projects in which to invest. If top management selects too many projects
that have high cash flow needs in the same year, the company will not be able to support
all of its projects and maintain its profitability. It is also important to clarify the year used
to analyze dollar amounts. For example, if a company bases all costs on 2018 estimates, it
would need to account for inflation and other factors when projecting costs and benefits in
future-year dollars.
Tangible and intangible costs and benefits are categories for determining how well
an organization can define the estimated costs and benefits for a project. Tangible costs
or benefits are easy to measure in dollars. For example, suppose that the Surveyor
Pro project described in the chapter's opening case included a preliminary feasibility
study. If a company completed this study for $100,000, its tangible cost is $100,000. If a
government agency estimated that it could have done the study for $150,000, the tangible
benefits of the study would be $50,000 to the government: It could pay for the study and
then assign the government workers who would have done the study to other projects.
In contrast, intangible costs or benefits are difficult to measure in dollars. Suppose
that Juan and a few other people spent their own personal time using government-owned
computers, books, and other resources to research areas related to the study. Although
their hours and the government-owned materials would not be billed to the project,
they could be considered intangible costs. Intangible benefits for projects often include
items like goodwill, prestige, and general statements of improved productivity that an
organization cannot easily translate into dollar amounts. Because intangible costs and
benefits are difficult to quantify, they are often harder to justify.
Direct costs can be directly related to creating the products and services of the
project. You can attribute direct costs to a particular project. For example, direct costs
include the salaries of people working full time on the project and the cost of hardware
and software purchased specifically for the project. Project managers should focus on
direct costs because they can be controlled.
Indirect costs are not directly related to the products or services of the project, but
are indirectly related to performing work on the project. For example, indirect costs
would include the cost of electricity, paper towels, and other necessities in a large building
that houses 1,000 employees who work on many projects. Indirect costs are allocated to
projects, and project managers have very little control over them.
Sunk cost is money that has been spent in the past. Consider it gone, like a sunken
ship that can never be raised. When deciding what projects to invest in or continue,
you should not include sunk costs. For example, in the chapter's opening case, suppose
that Juan's office had spent $1 million on a project over the past three years to create
a geographic information system, but had never produced anything valuable. If his
government were evaluating what projects to fund next year and an official suggested
continuing to fund the geographic information system project because $1 million had
been spent on it already, the official would incorrectly be making sunk cost a key factor
in the project selection decision. Many people fall into the trap of continuing to spend
Project Cost Management
293
money on a failing project because so much money has been spent on it already. This trap
is similar to gamblers who continue betting because they have already lost money. Sunk
costs should be forgotten, even though it is often difficult to think that way.
Learning curve theory states that when many items are produced repetitively, the
unit cost of those items decreases in a regular pattern as more units are produced. For
example, suppose that the Surveyor Pro project would potentially produce 1,000 handheld
devices that could run the new software and access information via satellite. The cost
of the first handheld unit would be much higher than the cost of the thousandth unit.
Learning curve theory can help estimate costs on projects that involve the production of
large quantities of items.
Learning curve theory also applies to the amount of time required to complete some
tasks. For example, the first time a new employee performs a specific task, it will probably
take longer than the tenth time that employee performs a very similar task. Effort
estimates, therefore, should be lower for more experienced workers.
Reserves are dollar amounts included in a cost estimate to mitigate cost risk by
allowing for future situations that are difficult to predict. Contingency reserves allow for
future situations that may be partially planned for (sometimes called known unknowns)
and are included in the project cost baseline. For example, if an organization knows it
has a 20 percent rate of turnover for IT personnel, it should include contingency reserves
to pay for recruiting and training costs of IT personnel. Management reserves allow for
future situations that are unpredictable (sometimes called unknown unknowns). For
example, if a project manager gets sick for two weeks or an important supplier goes out of
business, management reserve could be set aside to cover the resulting costs. Management
reserves are not included in a cost baseline, as you will learn later in this chapter.
A d v i c e f o r Y o u n g P r o f e s s i o n a l s
If you have never done so, take a class or do self-study in accounting, financial
statements, or financial management. There are many online resources and short
books available on the topics of finance for the non-financial manager, how to use
financial statements, or similar content. A project manager in IT will often encounter
such concepts as capital costs vs. operational costs; leasing vs. purchasing equipment
or other information assets; cost reduction strategies based on process improvements
or automation; and other common business uses of financial management terminology.
Project managers need to be able to converse with their business counterparts who
are expecting certain financial benefits from the project, who want a certain strategy
to manage costs, or who want to know the relationship between expenses and benefits
as the project unfolds. Financial specialists are often willing to help less-experienced
people better understand the key terminology of the financial field. These concepts are
not difficult to learn, and if you put forth the effort now to acquire confidence in these
topics, you will become a valuable partner in helping others to understand how your
project's expenses and benefits will fit into the organization's overall financial strategy.
Also remember to practice ethical decision making when dealing with project cost
management by being a good financial steward.
Chapter 7
294
Planning Cost Management
The first step in project cost management is planning how the costs will be managed
throughout the life of the project. Project costs, like project schedules, grow out of the
basic documents that initiate a project, like the project charter. The project manager and
other stakeholders use expert judgment, data analysis, and meetings to produce the cost
management plan.
The cost management plan, like the scope and schedule management plans, can be
informal and broad or formal and detailed, based on the needs of the project. In general, a
cost management plan includes the following information:

Level of accuracy: Activity cost estimates normally have rounding guidelines,
such as rounding to the nearest $100. There may also be guidelines for the
amount of contingency funds to include, such as 10 or 20 percent.

Units of measure: Each unit used in cost measurements, such as labor hours
or days, should be defined.

Organizational procedures links: Many organizations refer to the work
breakdown structure (WBS) component used for project cost accounting as
the control account (CA). Each control account is often assigned a unique
code that is used in the organization's accounting system. Project teams must
understand and use these codes properly.

Control thresholds: Similar to schedule variance, costs often have a specified
amount of variation allowed before action needs to be taken, such as
10 percent of the baseline cost.

Rules of performance measurement: If the project uses EVM, as described
later in this chapter, the cost management plan would define measurement
rules, such as how often actual costs will be tracked and to what level of
detail.

Reporting formats: This section would describe the format and frequency of
cost reports required for the project.

Process descriptions: The cost management plan would also describe how to
perform all of the cost management processes.
Estimating Costs
Project managers must take cost estimates seriously if they want to complete projects
within budget constraints. After developing a good resource requirements list, project
managers and their project teams must develop several estimates of the costs for these
resources. For example, if an activity for a project is to perform a particular type of test,
the list of activity resource requirements would describe the skill level of the people
needed to perform the test, the number of people and hours suggested to perform the
test, the need for special software or equipment, and other requirements. All of this
information is required to develop a good cost estimate. Chapter 9, Project Resource
Management, describes the process of estimating activity resources in more detail.
Project Cost Management
295
This section describes various types of cost estimates, tools and techniques for estimating
costs, typical problems associated with IT cost estimates, and a detailed example of a cost
estimate for an IT project.
Types of Cost Estimates
The main outputs of project cost management are cost estimates and basis of estimates.
Project managers normally prepare several types of cost estimates for most projects.
Three basic types of estimates include the following:

A rough order of magnitude (ROM) estimate provides an estimate of what
a project will cost. A ROM estimate can also be referred to as a ballpark
estimate, a guesstimate, a swag, or a broad gauge. This type of estimate is
done very early in a project or even before a project is officially started.
Project managers and top management use this estimate to help make
project selection decisions. The time frame for this type of estimate is often
three or more years prior to project completion. A ROM estimate's accuracy
is typically 250 percent to 1100 percent, meaning the project's actual costs
could be 50 percent below the ROM estimate or 100 percent above. For
example, the actual cost for a project with a ROM estimate of $100,000 could
range from $50,000 to $200,000. For IT project estimates, this accuracy
range is often much wider. Many IT professionals automatically double
estimates for software development because of the history of cost overruns
on IT projects.

A budgetary estimate is used to allocate money into an organization's
budget. Many organizations develop budgets at least two years into the
future. Budgetary estimates are made one to two years prior to project
completion. The accuracy of budgetary estimates is typically 210 percent
to 125 percent, meaning the actual costs could be 10 percent less or 25
percent more than the budgetary estimate. For example, the actual cost for
a project with a budgetary estimate of $100,000 could range from $90,000 to
$125,000.

A definitive estimate provides an accurate estimate of project costs.
Definitive estimates are used for making many purchasing decisions for
which accurate estimates are required and for estimating final project
costs. For example, if a project involves purchasing 1,000 personal
computers from an outside supplier in the next three months, a definitive
estimate would be required to aid in evaluating supplier proposals and
allocating the funds to pay the chosen supplier. Definitive estimates are
made one year or less prior to project completion. A definitive estimate
should be the most accurate of the three types of estimates. The accuracy
of this type of estimate is normally 25 percent to 110 percent, meaning
the actual costs could be 5 percent less or 10 percent more than the
definitive estimate. For example, the actual cost for a project with a
definitive estimate of $100,000 could range from $95,000 to $110,000.
Table 7-1 summarizes the three basic types of cost estimates.
Chapter 7
296
The number and type of cost estimates vary by application area. For example, the
Association for the Advancement of Cost Engineering (AACE) International identifies
five types of cost estimates for construction projects: order of magnitude, conceptual,
preliminary, definitive, and control. The main point is that estimates are usually done at
various stages of a project and should become more accurate as time progresses.
In addition to creating cost estimates for the entire project and activity cost estimates,
it is also important to provide supporting details for the estimates and updates to project
documents. The supporting details include the ground rules and assumptions used in
creating the estimate, a description of the project (such as scope statement and WBS)
used as a basis for the estimate, and details on the cost estimation tools and techniques
used to create the estimate. These supporting details should make it easier to prepare an
updated estimate or similar estimate as needed.
Another important consideration in preparing cost estimates is labor costs, because a
large percentage of total project costs are often labor costs. Many organizations estimate
the number of people or hours they need by department or skill over the life cycle of a
project. For example, when Northwest Airlines developed initial cost estimates for its
reservation system project, ResNet, it determined the maximum number of full-time
equivalent (FTE) staff it could assign to the project each year by department. Table 7-2
shows this information. FTE, as described in more detail under determining the budget,
is a standard way to refer to the total staffing required for a project regardless of whether
people work full time or part-time. Note the small number of contractors that Northwest
Airlines planned to use. Labor costs are often much higher for contractors, so it is
important to distinguish between internal and external resources. (See the Companion
website for this text to read the detailed case study on ResNet, including cost estimates.)
Cost Estimation Tools and Techniques
As you can imagine, developing a good cost estimate is difficult. Fortunately, several tools
and techniques are available to assist in creating one. Some of these tools and techniques
include expert judgment, analogous cost estimating, bottom-up estimating, three-point
Type of Estimate
When Done
Why Done
Typical Range
Rough order of
magnitude (ROM)
Very early in the
project life cycle,
often 3-5 years
before project
completion
Provides estimate
of cost for selection
decisions
250% to 1100%
Budgetary
Early, 1-2 years out
Puts dollars in the
budget plans
210% to 125%
Definitive
Later in the project,
less than 1 year out
Provides details for
purchases, estimates
actual costs
25% to 110%
Table 7-1  Types of cost estimates
Project Cost Management
297
estimating, parametric estimating, the cost of quality, project management estimating
software, vendor bid analysis, and reserve analysis.
Analogous estimates, also called top-down estimates, use the actual cost of a
previous, similar project as the basis for estimating the cost of the current project. This
technique requires a good deal of expert judgment and is generally less costly than other
techniques, but it is also less accurate. Analogous estimates are most reliable when the
previous projects are similar in fact, not just in appearance. In addition, the groups
preparing cost estimates must have the needed expertise to determine whether certain
parts of the project will be more or less expensive than analogous projects. For example,
estimators often try to find a similar project and then customize or modify it for known
differences. However, if the project to be estimated involves a new programming language
or working with a new type of hardware or network, the analogous estimate technique
could easily result in too low an estimate.
Bottom-up estimates involve estimating the costs of individual work items or
activities and summing them to get a project total. This approach is sometimes referred to
as activity-based costing. The size of the individual work items and the experience of the
estimators drive the accuracy of the estimates. If a detailed WBS is available for a project,
the project manager could require each person who is responsible for a work package
to develop a cost estimate for that work package, or at least an estimate of the amount
of resources required. Someone in the financial area of an organization often provides
resource cost rates, such as labor rates or costs per pound of materials, which can be
entered into project management software to calculate costs. The software automatically
calculates information to create cost estimates for each level of the WBS and finally for
the entire project. Using smaller work items increases the accuracy of the cost estimate
because the people assigned to do the work develop the cost estimate instead of someone
unfamiliar with the work. The drawback with bottom-up estimates is that they are usually
time-intensive and therefore expensive to develop.
Three-point estimates involve estimating the most likely, optimistic, and pessimistic
costs for items. You can use a formula like the PERT weighted average described in
Chapter 6, Project Schedule Management, to calculate cost estimates or use a Monte Carlo
simulation, described in Chapter 11, Project Risk Management.
Department
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Year 5
Totals
Information
systems
24
31
35
13
13
116
Marketing
systems
3
3
3
3
3
15
Reservations
12
29
33
9
7
90
Contractors
2
3
1
0
0
6
Totals
41
66
72
25
23
227
Table 7-2  Maximum FTE by department by year
Chapter 7
298
Parametric estimating uses project characteristics (parameters) in a mathematical
model to estimate project costs. For example, a parametric model might provide
an estimate of $50 per line of code for a software development project based on the
programming language the project is using, the level of expertise of the programmers, the
size and complexity of the data involved, and so on. Parametric models are most reliable
when the historical information used to create the model is accurate, the parameters
are readily quantifiable, and the model is flexible in terms of the project's size. Many
projects involving building construction use parametric estimates based on cost per
square foot. The costs vary based on the quality of construction, location, materials, and
other factors. In practice, many people find that using a combination or hybrid approach
with analogous, bottom-up, three-point, and parametric estimating provides the best cost
estimates.
Other considerations when preparing cost estimates are how much to include in
reserves, as described earlier; the cost of quality, as described in Chapter 8, Project
Quality Management; and other cost estimating methods such as vendor bid analysis, as
described in Chapter 12, Project Procurement Management. Using software to assist in
cost estimating is described later in this chapter.
Typical Problems with IT Cost Estimates
Although many tools and techniques can assist in creating project cost estimates, many
IT project cost estimates are still very inaccurate, especially those for new technologies
or software development. Tom DeMarco, a well-known author on software development,
suggests four reasons for these inaccuracies and some ways to overcome them.14

Estimates are done too quickly. Developing an estimate for a large software
project is a complex task that requires significant effort. Many estimates must
be done quickly and before clear system requirements have been produced.
For example, the Surveyor Pro project described in the opening case involves
a lot of complex software development. Before fully understanding what
information surveyors need in the system, someone would have to create a
ROM estimate and budgetary estimates for this project. Rarely are the more
precise, later cost estimates less than the earlier estimates for IT projects.
It is important to remember that estimates are done at various stages of the
project, and project managers need to explain the rationale for each estimate.

People lack estimating experience. The people who develop software cost
estimates often do not have much experience with cost estimation, especially
for large projects. They also do not have enough accurate, reliable project
data on which to base estimates. If an organization uses good project
management techniques and develops a history of keeping reliable project
information, including estimates, the organization's estimates should
improve. Enabling IT people to receive training and mentoring on cost
estimating will also improve cost estimates.

Human beings are biased toward underestimation. For example, senior IT
professionals or project managers might make estimates based on their own
abilities and forget that many younger people will be working on a project.
Project Cost Management
299
Estimators might also forget to allow for extra costs needed for integration
and testing on large IT projects. It is important for project managers and top
management to review estimates and ask important questions to make sure
the estimates are not biased.

Management desires accuracy. Management might ask for an estimate
but really want a more accurate number to help them create a bid to win
a major contract or get internal funding. This problem is similar to the
situation discussed in Chapter 6, Project schedule management, in which top
managers or other stakeholders want project schedules to be shorter than the
estimates. It is important for project managers to help develop good cost and
schedule estimates and to use their leadership and negotiation skills to stand
by those estimates.
It is also important to be cautious with initial estimates. Top management never
forgets the first estimate and rarely, if ever, remembers how approved changes affect the
estimate. It is a never-ending and crucial process to keep top management informed about
revised cost estimates. It should be a formal process, albeit a possibly painful one.
How to Develop a Cost Estimate and Basis of Estimates
One of the best ways to learn how the cost estimating process works is by studying sample
cost estimates. Every cost estimate is unique, just as every project is unique. You can
see a short sample cost estimate in Chapter 3 for JWD Consulting's project management
intranet site project. You can also view the ResNet cost estimate on the Companion
website for this text.
This section includes a step-by-step approach for developing a cost estimate for the
Surveyor Pro project described in the opening case. Of course, it is much shorter and
simpler than a real cost estimate, but it illustrates a process to follow and uses several of
the tools and techniques described earlier.
Before beginning a cost estimate, you must gather as much information as possible
about the project and ask how the organization plans to use the cost estimate. If the cost
estimate will be the basis for contract awards and performance reporting, it should be a
definitive estimate and as accurate as possible, as described earlier.
It is also important to clarify the ground rules and assumptions for the estimate. This
information should be documented in the basis of estimates, along with ground rules
and assumptions, known constraints, identified risks, and confidence level of the final
estimate. The Surveyor Pro project cost estimate includes the following ground rules and
assumptions:

This project was preceded by a detailed study and proof of concept to
show that it was possible to develop the hardware and software needed by
surveyors and link the new devices to existing information systems. The
proof of concept project produced a prototype handheld device and much of
the software to provide basic functionality and link to the Global Positioning
System (GPS) and other government databases used by surveyors. Some data
is available to help estimate future labor costs, especially for the software
development, and to help estimate the cost of the handheld devices.
Chapter 7
300

The main goal of this project is to produce 100 handheld devices, continue
developing the software (especially the user interface), test the new system
in the field, and train 100 surveyors in selected cities to use the new system.
A follow-up contract is expected for a much larger number of devices based
on the success of this project.

The project has the following WBS:
1. Project management
2. Hardware
2.1  Handheld devices
2.2  Servers
3. Software
3.1  Licensed software
3.2  Software development
4. Testing
5. Training and support
6. Reserves

Costs must be estimated by WBS and by month. The project manager will
report progress on the project using earned value analysis, which requires
this type of estimate.

Costs will be provided in U.S. dollars. Because the project length is one year,
inflation will not be included.

The project will be managed by the government's project office. The project
will require a part-time project manager and four team members. The team
members will help manage various parts of the project and provide their
expertise in the areas of software development, training, and support. Their
total hours will be allocated as follows: 25 percent to project management,
25 percent to software development, 25 percent to training and support, and
25 percent to non-project work.

The project involves purchasing the handheld devices from the same
company that developed the prototype device. Based on producing 100
devices, the cost rate is estimated to be $600 per unit. The project will
require four additional servers to run the software required for the devices
and for managing the project.

The project requires purchased software licenses for accessing the GPS and
three other external systems. Software development includes developing a
graphical user interface for the devices, an online help system, and a new
module for tracking surveyor performance using the device.

Testing costs should be low due to the success of the prototype project. An
estimate based on multiplying the total hardware and software estimates by
10 percent should be sufficient.

Training will include instructor-led classes in five different locations. The
project team believes it will be best to outsource most of the training,
including developing course materials, holding the sessions, and providing
Project Cost Management
301
help desk support for three months as the surveyors start using their devices
in the field.

Because several risks are related to this project, include 20 percent of the
total estimate as reserves.

You must develop a computer model for the estimate so that you can
easily change several inputs, such as the number of labor hours for various
activities or labor rates.
Fortunately, the project team can easily access cost estimates and actual information
from similar projects. A great deal of information is available from the proof of concept
project, and the team can also talk to contractors from the past project to help them
develop the estimate. Computer models are also available, such as a software-estimating
tool based on function points. Function points are a means of measuring software size
based on what the software does for end users. Function points are comprised of inputs,
outputs, inquiries, internal data, and external interface data. Allen Albrecht initially
defined this metric in the 1970s, and today it is the international standard used to
measure software size. It is the most commonly used software size metric, followed by
lines of code.15
Because the estimate must be provided by WBS and by month, the team first reviews
a draft of the project schedule. The team decides to begin by estimating the cost of each
WBS item and then determine when the work will be performed, even though costs may
be incurred at different times than when the work is performed. The team's budget expert
has approved this approach for the estimate. The team has further assumptions and
information for estimating the costs for each WBS category:
1. Project management: Estimate based on compensation for the part-time
project manager and 25 percent of the four team members' time. The
budget expert for this project suggested using a labor rate of $100/hour
for the project manager and $75/hour for each team member, based
on working an average of 160 hours per month, full time. Therefore,
the total hours for the project manager under this category are
5
960 (160/2 * 12
960). Costs are also included for the four project
team members who are each working 25 percent of their time: a total
of 160 hours per month for all project personnel (160*12
1,920)
5
. An
additional amount for all contracted labor is estimated by multiplying
10 percent of the total estimates for software development and testing
costs
1
(10%*($594,000
$69,000)).
2. Hardware
2.1 Handheld devices: 100 devices estimated by contractor at $600 per unit.
2.2 Servers: Four servers estimated at $4,000 each, based on recent server
purchases.
3. Software
3.1 Licensed software: License costs will be negotiated with each supplier.
Because there is a strong probability of large future contracts and great
publicity if the system works well, costs are expected to be lower than
usual. A cost of $200/handheld device will be used.
Chapter 7
302
3.2 Software development: This estimate will include two approaches: a
labor estimate and a function point estimate. The higher estimate will
be used. If the estimates differ by more than 20 percent, the project will
require a third estimation approach. The supplier who developed the
proof of concept project will provide the labor estimate input, and local
technical experts will make the function point estimates.
4. Testing: Based on similar projects, testing will be estimated as 10 percent of
the total hardware and software cost.
5. Training and support: Based on similar projects, training will be estimated on
a per-trainee basis, plus travel costs. The cost per trainee (100 total) will be
$500, and travel will cost $700/day/person for the instructors and project team
members. The team estimates that the project will require a total of 12 travel
days. Labor costs for the project team members will be added to this estimate
because they will assist in training and providing support after the training.
The labor hours estimate for team members is 1,920 hours total.
6. Reserves: As directed, reserves will be estimated at 20 percent of the total
estimate.
The project team then develops a cost model using the preceding information.
Figure 7-2 shows a spreadsheet that summarizes the costs by WBS item. Notice that the
Figure 7-2  Surveyor Pro project cost estimate
# Units/Hrs. Cost/Unit/Hr.
Subtotals
WBS Level 2 Totals % of Total
WBS Items
1. Project Management
$306,300
20%
Project manager
$100
$96,000
Project team members
$75
$144,000
Contractors (10% of software
development and testing)
$66,300
2. Hardware
$76,000
5%
2.1 Handheld devices
$600
$60,000
2.2 Servers
$4,000
$16,000
3. Software
$614,000
40%
3.1 Licensed software
$200
$20,000
3.2 Software development*
$594,000
4. Testing (10% of total hardware
and software costs)
$69,000
$69,000
5%
5. Training and Support
$202,400
13%
Trainee cost
$500
$50,000
Travel cost
$700
$8,400
Project team members
$75
$144,000
6. Reserves (20% of total estimate)
$253,540
$253,540
17%
Total project cost estimate
$1,521,240
*See software development estimate.
960
1,920
100
4
100
100
12
1,920
Subtotal
$1,267,700
Surveyor Pro Project Cost Estimate Created October 5
Project Cost Management
303
WBS items are listed in the first column, and some are broken down into more detail
based on how the costs are estimated. For example, the project management category is
broken down into three subcategories because the project manager, team members, and
contractors will each perform project management activities that must be accounted for in
the costs. Also notice the columns for entering the number of units or hours and the cost
per unit or hour. Several items are estimated using this approach. The estimate includes
some short comments, such as reserves being 20 percent of the total estimate. Also notice
that you can easily change several input variables, such as number of hours or cost per
hour, to revise the estimate.
The asterisk by the software development item in Figure 7-2 provides reference
for detailed information on how this more complicated estimate was made. Recall
the assumption that software development must be estimated using two approaches,
and that the higher estimate would be used as long as both estimates differed by no
more than 20 percent. The labor estimate was used in this case because it was slightly
higher than the function point estimate ($594,000 versus $567,000). Figure 7-3
shows how the function point estimate was made, and the Best Practice feature
provides more information on function point estimates. As you can see, many
assumptions were made in producing the function point estimate. By putting the
information into a cost model, you can easily change several inputs to adjust the
estimate.
Also note that this sample estimate provides a discrete value of $1,521,240 for the
total project cost estimate. The project team might round this number to $1.5 million, and
suggest to senior management that it could be 10 percent above or below this number.
Figure 7-3  Surveyor pro software development estimate
Surveyor Pro Software Development Estimate Created October 5
1. Labor Estimate
# Units/Hrs. Cost/Unit/Hr. Subtotals
Calculations
Contractor labor estimate
3,000
$150
$450,000
3,000 ∗ 150
Project team member estimate
1,920
$75
$144,000
1,920 ∗ 75
Total labor estimate
$594,000
Sum above two values
2. Function point estimate
Quantity
Conversion
Factor
Function
Points
Calculations
External inputs
10
4
40
10 ∗ 4
External interface ﬁles
3
7
21
3 ∗ 7
External outputs
4
5
20
4 ∗ 5
External queries
6
4
24
6 ∗ 4
Logical internal tables
7
10
70
7 ∗ 10
Total function points
175
Sum above function point
values
Java 2 language equivalency
value
46
Assumed value from
reference
Source lines of code (SLOC) estimate
8,050
175 ∗ 46
Productivity×KSLOC^Penalty
(in months)
29.28
3.13 ∗ 8.05^1.072
(see reference)
Total labor hours
(27 hours/function point)*
4,725
27*175
Cost/labor hour ($120/hour)
$120
Assumed value from
budget expert
Total function point estimate
$567,000
4,725 ∗120
* Based on historical data
Chapter 7
304
It is very important to have several people review the project cost estimate. It is also
helpful to analyze the total dollar value as well as the percentage of the total amount
for each major WBS category. For example, a senior executive could quickly look at the
Surveyor Pro project cost estimate and decide if the numbers are reasonable and the
assumptions are well documented. In this case, the government had budgeted $1.5 million
for the project, so the estimate was in line with that amount. The WBS Level 2 items, such
as project management, hardware, software, and testing, also seemed to be at appropriate
percentages of the total cost based on similar past projects. In some cases, a project team
might also be asked to provide a range estimate for each item instead of one discrete
amount. For example, the team might estimate that the testing costs will be between
$60,000 and $80,000 and document their assumptions in determining those values. It is
also important to update cost estimates, especially if any major changes occur on a project.
After the total cost estimate and basis of estimates are approved, the team can
then allocate costs for each month based on the project schedule and when costs will
be incurred. Many organizations also require that the estimated costs be allocated into
certain budget categories, as described in the next section.
B e s t P r a c t i c e
Software expert and author Alvin Alexander shared his knowledge on the challenging topic
of estimating software development costs in several presentations and a book called Cost
Estimating in an Agile Development Environment (2015). Alexander describes how to use
Function Point Analysis (FPA) techniques based on his personal experience working on a
multimillion-dollar software project over five years. (Recall that function points are a means
of measuring software size in terms that are meaningful to end users.) The project initially
used a more traditional, waterfall approach but later moved to a more agile approach.
Alexander explained that at the beginning of the project, when requirements
documents were very long and detailed, the programming work took about three times
the amount of time that was required to create the requirements (a ratio of 3:1). Later
in the project, after their client trusted them more and actually knew the developers
by name, the requirements were much shorter (more like user stories), and the ratio of
programming work to requirements work was much higher-6:1 to 9.5:1. User stories
describe what users do or need to do as part of their job function, focusing on the "who,"
"what," and "why" of a requirement in a simple, concise way. Developers can analyze
user stories to estimate the number of internal logical files (ILFs)-a group of logically
related data that resides entirely within the application boundary and is maintained
through external inputs. You can then use the ILFs to approximate the number of
function points, and then multiply by a certain number of hours/function point to
estimate the person-hours needed to develop the software.16
World-class organizations take about half as long as average organizations (19 versus
35 hours) to develop one function point. They use consistent documentation (for
requirements, analysis, and use cases), they follow consistent processes for developing
software, and their technical staff focus on business instead of technology. "It is impossible
to separate world-class organizations from world-class metrics organizations."17
Project Cost Management
305
Determining the Budget
Determining the budget involves allocating the project cost estimate to individual
material resources or work items over time. These material resources or work items
are based on the activities in the WBS for the project. The project management plan,
project documents, business documents, agreements, enterprise environmental factors
and organizational process assets are all inputs for determining the budget. The main
goal of the cost budgeting process is to produce a cost baseline for measuring project
performance and to determine project funding requirements. The process may also result
in project documents updates, such as items being added, removed, or modified in the
scope statement or project schedule.
The Surveyor Pro project team would use the cost estimate from Figure 7-2 along with
the project schedule and other information to allocate costs for each month. Figure 7-4
provides an example of a cost baseline for this project. A cost baseline is a time-phased
budget that project managers use to measure and monitor cost performance. It does include
contingency reserves but does not include management reserves. Recall that contingency
reserves are for known unknowns while management reserves are for unknown unknowns.
Figure 7-5 shows the various components of the project budget. The project budget
is composed of the cost baseline plus management reserve. Control accounts are work
package cost estimates plus contingency reserve. Work package cost estimates are activity
cost estimates plus activity contingency reserve.
Most organizations have a well-established process for preparing budgets. For
example, many organizations require budget estimates to include the number of FTE
for each month of the project. One FTE normally means 40 hours of work. One person
could be assigned full time to a project to provide one FTE, or two people could be
assigned half-time to provide one FTE. This number provides the basis for estimating
total compensation costs each year. Many organizations also want to know the amount of
money projected to be paid to suppliers for their labor costs or other purchased goods and
services. Other common budget categories include travel, depreciation, rents and leases,
Figure 7-4  Surveyor Pro project cost baseline
WBS Items
1. Project Management
1.1 Project manager
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
96,000
1.2 Project team members
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
144,000
1.3 Contractors
6,027
6,027
6,027
6,027
6,027
6,027
6,027
6,027
6,027
6,027
6,027
66,300
2. Hardware
2.1 Handheld devices
30,000
30,000
60,000
2.2 Servers
8,000
8,000
16,000
3. Software
3.1 Licensed software
10,000
10,000
20,000
3.2 Software development
60,000
60,000
80,000 127,000
127,000
90,000
50,000
594,000
4. Testing
6,000
8,000
12,000
15,000
15,000
13,000
69,000
5. Training and Support
5.1 Trainee cost
50,000
50,000
5.2 Travel cost
8,400
8,400
5.3 Project team members
24,000
24,000
24,000
24,000
24,000
24,000
144,000
6. Reserves
10,000
10,000
30,000
30,000
60,000
40,000
40,000
30,000
3,540
253,540
Totals
20,000
86,027
92,027
172,027 223,027
198,027
185,027
173,027
148,427
90,027
80,027
53,567
1,521,240
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Totals
*See the lecture slides for this chapter on the Instructor website for a larger view of this and other
ﬁgures in this chapter. Numbers are rounded, so some totals appear to be off.
Surveyor Pro Project Cost Baseline Created October 10*
Months
Chapter 7
306
and other supplies and expenses. It is important to understand these budget categories
before developing an estimate to make sure data is collected accordingly. Organizations
use this information to track costs across projects and non-project work and to look for
ways to reduce costs. They also use the information for legal and tax purposes.
In addition to providing a cost baseline, estimating costs for each major project
activity over time provides project managers and top management with a foundation for
project cost control, as described in the next section. Cost budgeting, as well as requested
changes or clarifications, may result in updates to the cost management plan, which
is a subsidiary part of the project management plan. See Appendix A (available on the
Companion website for this text) for information on using Project 2016 for cost control.
Cost budgeting also provides information for project funding requirements. Some
projects have all funds available when the project begins, but others must rely on periodic
funding to avoid cash flow problems. If the cost baseline shows that more funds are
required in certain months than are expected to be available, the organization must make
adjustments to avoid financial problems.
Controlling Costs
Controlling project costs includes monitoring cost performance, ensuring that only
appropriate project changes are included in a revised cost baseline, and informing project
stakeholders of authorized changes to the project that will affect costs. The project
Source: PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition. Project Management Institute, Inc. (2017). Copyright and
all rights reserved. Material from this publication has been reproduced with permission of PMI.
Figure 7-5  Project budget components
Total Amount
Project
Budget
Project Budget Component
Management
Reserve
Cost
Baseline
Control
Accounts
Contingency
Reserve
Activity
Contingency Reserve
Activity Cost
Estimates
Work Package
Cost Estimates
Project Cost Management
307
management plan, project documents, project funding requirements, work performance
data, and organizational process assets are inputs for controlling costs. Outputs of this
process are work performance information, cost forecasts, change requests, project
management plan updates, and project documents updates.
Several tools and techniques assist in project cost control, including expert judgment,
data analysis, project management information systems, and the to-complete performance
index (described in the next section on earned value management).
Earned Value Management
Earned value management (EVM) is a project performance measurement technique
that integrates scope, time, and cost data. Given a cost performance baseline, project
managers and their teams can determine how well the project is meeting scope, time,
and cost goals by entering actual information and then comparing it to the baseline. As
defined in Chapter 4, a baseline is a starting point, a measurement, or an observation
that is documented so that it can be used for future comparison. Actual information
includes whether or not a WBS item was completed, approximately how much of the
work was completed, when the work actually started and ended, and how much the
completed work actually cost.
Earned value management involves calculating three values for each activity or
summary activity from a project's WBS.
1. The planned value (PV) is the authorized budget assigned to scheduled
work. Table 7-3 shows an example of earned value calculations. Suppose
that a project included a summary activity of purchasing and installing a
new web server. Suppose further that, according to the plan, it would take
one week and cost a total of $10,000 for the labor hours, hardware, and
software. Therefore, the planned value (PV) for the activity that week is
$10,000.
2. The actual cost (AC) is the realized cost incurred for the work performed
on an activity during a specific time period. For example, suppose that it
actually took two weeks and cost $20,000 to purchase and install the new
web server. Assume that $15,000 of these actual costs were incurred during
Week 1 and $5,000 was incurred during Week 2. These amounts are the
actual cost (AC) for the activity each week.
3.
The earned value (EV) is the measure of work performed expressed in terms of
the budget authorized for that work. It cannot be greater than the authorized
PV budget for a component as it is calculated as the sum of the PV of the
completed work. In Table 7-3, the earned value after one week is $5,000.18
The earned value calculations in Table 7-4 are carried out as follows:
5
2
52
CV
5,000
15,000
10,000
5
2
52
SV
5,000
10,000
5,000
5
5
CPI
5,000/15,000
33%
5
5
SPI
5,000/10,000
50%
Chapter 7
308
Table 7-4 summarizes the formulas used in EVM. Note that the formulas for variances
and indexes start with EV, the earned value. Variances are calculated by subtracting the
actual cost or planned value from EV, and indexes are calculated by dividing EV by the
actual cost or planned value. After you total the EV, AC, and PV data for all activities on a
project, you can use the CPI and SPI to project how much it will cost and how long it will
take to finish the project based on performance to date. Given the budget at completion
and original time estimate, you can divide by the appropriate index to calculate the
estimate at completion (EAC) and estimated time to complete, assuming that performance
remains the same. There are no standard acronyms for the terms estimated time to
complete or original time estimate.
Cost variance (CV) is the earned value minus the actual cost. If cost variance is
a negative number, it means that performing the work cost more than planned. If cost
variance is a positive number, performing the work cost less than planned.
Schedule variance (SV) is the earned value minus the planned value. A negative
schedule variance means that it took longer than planned to perform the work, and a
positive schedule variance means that the work took less time than planned.
Term
Formula
Earned value (EV)
5
EV
PV of all completed work
Cost variance (CV)
5
2
CV
EV
AC
Schedule variance (SV)
5
2
SV
EV
PV
Cost performance index (CPI)
5
CPI
EV/AC
Schedule performance index (SPI)
5
SPI
EV/PV
Estimate at completion (EAC)
5
EAC
BAC/CPI
Estimated to Complete (ETC)
5
2
ETC
EAC
AC
Table 7-4  Earned value formulas
Activity
Week 1
Earned value (EV)
5,000
Planned value (PV)
10,000
Actual cost (AC)
15,000
Cost variance (CV)
210,000
Schedule variance (SV)
25,000
Cost performance index (CPI)
33%
Schedule performance index (SPI)
50%
Table 7-3  Earned value calculations for one activity after week 1
Project Cost Management
309
The cost performance index (CPI) is the ratio of earned value to actual cost; it can
be used to estimate the projected cost of completing the project. If the CPI is equal to
one, or 100 percent, then the planned and actual costs are equal-the costs are exactly as
budgeted. If the CPI is less than one or less than 100 percent, the project is over budget. If
the CPI is greater than one or more than 100 percent, the project is under budget.
The schedule performance index (SPI) is the ratio of earned value to planned value;
it can be used to estimate the projected time to complete the project. Similar to the cost
performance index, an SPI of one, or 100 percent, means the project is on schedule. If the
SPI is greater than one or 100 percent, then the project is ahead of schedule. If the SPI is
less than one or 100 percent, the project is behind schedule.
Note that in general, negative numbers for cost and schedule variance indicate
problems in those areas. Negative numbers mean the project is costing more than
planned or taking longer than planned. Likewise, a CPI and an SPI of less than one or less
than 100 percent also indicate problems.
The cost performance index can be used to calculate the estimate at completion
(EAC)-an estimated cost of completing a project based on performance to date.
Similarly, the schedule performance index can be used to calculate an estimated time to
complete the project. You can also calculate the to-complete performance index (TCPI),
a measure of the cost performance that must be achieved with the remaining resources to
meet a specific goal, such as the BAC or EAC. There are two formulas based on each goal:
To complete on plan or meet the BAC:
5
2
2
TCPI
(BAC
EV)/(BAC
AC)
To meet the current EAC:
5
2
2
TCPI
(BAC
EV)/(EAC
AC)
You can graph earned value information to track project performance. Figure 7-6
shows an earned value chart for a one-year project after five months. Note that the
Figure 7-6  Earned value chart for project after five months
120,000
Month
80,000
60,000
40,000
20,000
-
$
Earned value (EV)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
100,000
9
10
11
Actual cost (AC)
Planned value (PV)
Budget at completion (BAC)
Estimate at completion (EAC)
12
13
An EAC
point above
and to the
right of the
BAC point
means the
project is
projected to
cost more
and take
longer than
planned.
Actual cost (AC)
Planned value (PV)
Earned value (EV)
Chapter 7
310
actual cost and earned value lines end at five months because the data were collected or
estimated at that point. The chart includes three lines and two points, as follows:

Planned value (PV), the cumulative planned amounts for all activities by
month. Note that the planned value line extends for the estimated length of
the project and ends at the BAC point.

Actual cost (AC), the cumulative actual amounts for all activities by
month.

Earned value (EV), the cumulative earned value amounts for all activities by
month.

Budget at completion (BAC), the original total budget for the project, or
$100,000 in this example. The BAC point is plotted on the chart at the
original time estimate of 12 months.

Estimate at completion (EAC), estimated to be $122,308 in this example.
This number is calculated by taking the BAC, or $100,000 in this case,
and dividing by the CPI, which was 81.761 percent. This EAC point is
plotted on the chart at the estimated time to complete of 12.74 months.
This number is calculated by taking the original time estimate, or
12 months in this case, and dividing by the SPI, which in this example was
94.203 percent.
Viewing earned value information in chart form helps you visualize how the project is
performing. For example, you can see the planned performance by looking at the planned
value line. If the project goes as planned, it will finish in 12 months and cost $100,000.
Notice in the example in Figure 7-6 that the actual cost line is always on or above the
earned value line, which indicates that costs are equal to or more than planned. The
planned value line is close to the earned value line and is slightly higher in the last month.
This relationship means that the project has been on schedule until the last month, when
the project fell behind schedule.
Top managers who oversee multiple projects often like to see performance
information in a graphical form, such as the earned value chart in Figure 7-6.
For example, in the opening case, the government officials were reviewing earned
value charts and EACs for several different projects. Earned value charts allow you
to see quickly how projects are performing. If there are serious cost and schedule
performance problems, top management may decide to terminate projects or
take other corrective action. The EACs are important inputs to budget decisions,
especially if total funds are limited. Earned value management is an important
technique when used effectively, because it helps top management and project
managers evaluate progress and make sound management decisions. Consult the
PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition and other resources for more information and
calculations about earned value.
If earned value management is such a powerful cost control tool, then why
doesn't every organization use it? Why do many government projects require it,
but many commercial projects don't? Two reasons are EVM's focus on tracking
Project Cost Management
311
actual performance versus planned performance and the importance of percentage
completion data in making calculations. Many projects, particularly IT projects, do not
have good planning information, so tracking performance against a plan might produce
misleading information. Several cost estimates are usually made on IT projects, and
keeping track of the most recent cost estimate and the associated actual costs could
be cumbersome. In addition, estimating percentage completion of tasks might produce
misleading information. What does it mean to say that a task is actually 75 percent
complete after three months? Such a statement is often not synonymous with saying
the task will be finished in one more month or after spending an additional 25 percent
of the planned budget.
To make EVM simpler to use, organizations can modify the level of detail and still
reap the benefits of the technique. For example, you can use percentage completion
data such as 0 percent for items not yet started, 50 percent for items in progress, and
100 percent for completed tasks. As long as the project is defined in enough detail, this
simplified percentage completion data should provide enough summary information
to allow managers to see how well a project is doing overall. You can get very accurate
total project performance information using these simple percentage complete amounts.
For example, using simplified percentage complete amounts for a one-year project with
weekly reporting and an average task size of one week, you can expect about a 1 percent
error rate.19
You can enter and collect earned value data only at summary levels of the
WBS. Quentin Fleming, author of the book Earned Value Project Management,20
often gives presentations about EVM. Many people express their frustration in
trying to collect such detailed information. Fleming explains that you do not have
to collect information at the work package level to use EVM. It is most important
to have a deliverable-oriented WBS, and many WBS items can summarize several
subdeliverables. For example, you might have a WBS for a house that includes items
for each room in the house. Collecting earned value data for each room would provide
meaningful information instead of trying to collect detailed information for each
component in the room, such as flooring, furniture, and lighting.
It is important to remember that the heart and soul of EVM are estimates, which are
used to determine baselines. The entire EVM process begins with an estimate; when the
estimate is off, all the calculations will be off. Before an organization attempts to use EVM,
it must learn to develop good estimates.
Earned value management is the primary method available for integrating performance,
cost, and schedule data. It can be a powerful tool for project managers and top management
to use in evaluating project performance. Project management software, such as Project
2016, includes tables for collecting earned value data and reports that calculate variance
information. Project 2016 also allows you to easily produce an earned value chart, similar
to the one in Figure 7-6, without importing the data into Microsoft Excel. See the project
cost management section of Appendix A for an example of using EVM.
Another approach to evaluating the performance of multiple projects is project
portfolio management, as described in the next section.
Chapter 7
312
Project Portfolio Management
As you saw in Chapter 1, many organizations now collect and control an entire suite
of projects or investments as one set of interrelated activities in one place-a portfolio.
Several software tools provide graphics to summarize performance on a portfolio of
projects, as shown in Chapter 4. Key metrics, including cost performance, are often shown
in green, yellow, or red, indicating that things are going as planned, that problems exist,
or that major problems exist, respectively. Project managers need to understand how their
projects fit into the bigger picture. For example, there can be a portfolio for IT projects
and portfolios for other types of projects. Looking at broad categories of similar projects
enables project managers to help their organizations make wise investment decisions.
An organization can view project portfolio management as having five levels, from
simplest to most complex, as follows:
1. Put all your projects in one database.
2. Prioritize the projects in your database.
G l o b a l I s s u e s
The Project Management Institute conducted a major study in 2011 to help understand
and gauge the current level of EVM practice. The researchers surveyed more than 600
project management practitioners in 61 countries, providing a cross-sectional view of the
most current EVM practices. Respondents were classified by industry sector, motivation
for EVM usage, organizational role, and geographic location. The study included the
following key findings:

EVM is used worldwide, and it is particularly popular in the Middle East, South
Asia, Canada, and Europe.

Most countries require EVM for large defense or government projects, as shown
in Figure 7-7.

EVM is also used in such private-industry sectors as IT, construction, energy,
and manufacturing. However, most private companies have not yet applied
EVM to their projects because management does not require it, feeling it is too
complex and not cost effective.

The level of EVM use and maturity varies among organizations and projects,
but budget size appears to be the most important decision factor.

EVM's contributions and cost effectiveness are widely recognized; most
respondents said they agree or strongly agree that EVM provides early
warning signs, helping them to control project scope, time, and cost.
EVM's contribution to cost performance was ranked higher than schedule
performance, and the difference was statistically significant.

Top barriers to enhanced use of EVM were lack of motivation and lack of expertise.

Top management support, buy-in of project staff, training, organizational
culture and leadership, and maturity of the project management system were
the most important factors in successful use of EVM.21
Project Cost Management
313
3. Divide your projects into two or three budgets based on type of investment,
such as utilities or required systems to keep things running, incremental
upgrades, and strategic investments.
4. Automate the repository.
5. Apply modern portfolio theory, including risk-return tools that map project
risk on a curve.
Many project managers also want to move on to manage larger projects, become
program managers, then vice presidents, and eventually CEOs. Understanding project
portfolio management, therefore is important for both project and organizational
success.
Jane Walton, the project portfolio manager for IT projects at Schlumberger, saved
the company $3 million in one year by organizing the organization's 120 IT projects
into a portfolio. Manufacturing companies have used project portfolio management
since the 1960s, and Walton anticipated the need to justify investments in IT projects
just as managers have to justify capital investment projects. She found that 80 percent
of the organization's projects overlapped, and that 14 separate projects were trying to
accomplish the same thing. Other managers, such as Douglas Hubbard, president of
a consulting firm, see the need to use project portfolio management, especially for IT
projects. Hubbard suggests, "IT investments are huge, risky investments. It's time we
do this."22
Source: Lingguang Song, "Earned Value Management: A Global and Cross-Industry Perspective
on Current EVM Practice," PMI (2011), p. 36.
Figure 7-7  Earned value usage
19.5
51.3
29.2
31.9
32.2
35.8
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
A few pilot
projects
Large and critical
projects
Organization-wide
standard for
all projects
Percentage
Defense/Government
Private industry
Chapter 7
314
Project portfolio managers can start by using spreadsheet software to develop and
manage project portfolios, or they can use sophisticated software designed to help manage
project portfolios. Several software tools available today help project portfolio managers
summarize earned value and project portfolio information, as described in the following
section.
Using Project Management Software to Assist
in Project Cost Management
Most organizations use software to assist with project cost management. Spreadsheets
are a common tool for cost estimating, cost budgeting, and cost control. Many companies
also use more sophisticated and centralized financial software to provide important cost-
related information to accounting and finance personnel. This section focuses on how you
can use project management software in cost management. Appendix A includes a section
on using the cost management features in Project 2016.
Project management software can increase a project manager's effectiveness
during each process of project cost management. It can help you study overall project
information or identify and focus on tasks that are over a specified cost limit. You can
use the software to assign costs to resources and tasks, prepare cost estimates, develop
cost budgets, and monitor cost performance. Project 2016 has several standard cost
reports: cash flow, budget, over-budget tasks, over-budget resources, and earned value
reports. For several of these reports, you must enter percentage completion information
and actual costs, just as you do when manually calculating earned value or other
analyses.
Many IT project managers use other tools to manage cost information because they
do not know that they can use project management software, or they do not track costs
based on a WBS, as most project management software does. Instead of using dedicated
project management software for cost management, some IT project managers use
company accounting systems; others use spreadsheet software to achieve more flexibility.
Project managers who use other software often do so because these other systems are
more generally accepted in their organizations and more people know how to use them.
To improve project cost management, several companies have developed methods to link
data between their project management software and their main accounting software.
Regardless, users need training to use dedicated project management software and
understand the available features.
Many organizations are using software to organize and analyze all types of project
data into project portfolios and across the entire enterprise. Enterprise or project portfolio
management (PPM) tools integrate information from multiple projects to show the
projects' status and health. Over half of the respondents in two different studies (PMI's
PMI Pulse of the Profession and a PricewaterhouseCoopers survey) reported frequent
use of PPM. The highest adoption rates were reported by organizations in retail, insurance,
auto, banking and capital markets, telecommunications, manufacturing, energy, and
defense. The main reasons organizations use PPM included customer satisfaction, cost
reduction, and revenue growth.23
Project Cost Management
315
More recently, a 2017 report from Gartner says that the market for PPM software
continues to grow, with annual sales over $2.3 billion. "Organizations are driving toward
growth, innovation, and transformation at a faster pace than ever before, requiring PMOs
to evolve beyond on-time, on-budget project delivery to realize the full potential of their
resources and deliver portfolios with higher strategic value," said Patrick Tickle, Planview
chief product officer.24
A study by Forrester estimates that companies are achieving returns of 250 percent
from their investments in PPM tools. At a Planisware PPM Solutions Summit in 2014,
customers shared examples of their success stories in achieving even higher returns:

Pfizer uses PPM software to accelerate innovation and improve transparency
and accountability of resources to deliver scientific excellence. Pfizer can
quickly access trusted data analytics to make strategic resource allocations
that maximize portfolio value.

Ford uses Planisware to gain greater transparency over their portfolio of
projects. Greater transparency gives management a better understanding
of resources shared across projects, and enhances communication
about statuses. They can quickly alert affected program managers and
product development teams of potential risks so they can implement risk
management strategies.25
As with using any software, however, managers must make sure that the data
is accurate and up to date, and ask pertinent questions before making any major
decisions.
Considerations for Agile/Adaptive Environments
The PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition provides the following information for project cost
management:
Projects with high degrees of uncertainty or those where the scope is not yet fully
defined may not benefit from detailed cost calculations due to frequent changes.
Instead, lightweight estimation methods can be used to generate a fast, high-level
forecast of project labor costs, which can then be easily adjusted as changes arise.
Detailed estimates are reserved for short-term planning horizons in a just-in-time
fashion.
In cases where high-variability projects are also subject to strict budgets, the scope
and schedule are more often adjusted to stay within cost constraints.26
Remember that projects are usually part of a program and portfolio. Senior managers
in charge of the programs and portfolios are making high-level budget decisions. Most
programs include projects with a variety of product life cycles (predictive, iterative,
incremental, adaptive, and hybrid, as described in Chapter 2). For those projects or
parts of projects using an adaptive or agile approach, the product owner secures funding,
sometimes one release at a time. Agile teams, therefore, focus on completing requirements
based on their priority (from the product backlog).
Chapter 7
316
Can you use EVM on Agile projects? Yes, you can use an adaptation of EVM, as
described below. Read the referenced article and other sources for more details on this
topic.
AgileEVM is an adapted implementation of EVM that uses the Scrum framework
artifacts as inputs, uses traditional EVM calculations, and is expressed in traditional
EVM metrics. AgileEVM requires a minimal set of input parameters: the actual cost of
a project, an estimated product backlog, a release plan that provides information on
the number of iterations in the release and the assumed velocity. All estimates can be
in hours, story-points, team days or any other consistent estimate of size. The critical
factor is that it must be a numerical estimate of some kind.27
C a s e W r a p - U p
After talking to his colleagues about the meeting, Juan had a better idea about the
importance of project cost management. He understood the value of doing detailed
studies before making major expenditures on new projects, especially after learning
about the high cost of correcting defects late in a project. He also learned the importance
of developing good cost estimates and keeping costs on track. He enjoyed seeing how the
cost estimate was developed for the Surveyor Pro project, and was eager to learn more
about various estimating tools and techniques.
At the meeting, government officials canceled several projects when the project
managers showed how poorly the projects were performing and admitted that they did
not do much planning and analysis early in the projects. Juan knew that he could not
focus on just the technical aspects of projects if he wanted to move ahead in his career.
He began to wonder whether several projects the city was considering were really worth
the taxpayers' money. Issues of cost management added a new dimension to Juan's job.
Project Cost Management
317
Chapter Summary
Project cost management is traditionally a weak area of IT projects. IT project managers must
acknowledge the importance of cost management and take responsibility for understanding
basic cost concepts, cost estimating, budgeting, and cost control.
Project managers must understand several basic principles of cost management to be
effective in managing project costs. Important concepts include profits and profit margins, life
cycle costing, cash flow analysis, sunk costs, and learning curve theory.
Planning cost management involves determining the policies, procedures, and
documentation that will be used for planning, executing, and controlling project cost. The main
output of this process is a cost management plan.
Estimating costs is a very important part of project cost management. There are several
types of cost estimates, including rough order of magnitude (ROM), budgetary, and definitive.
Each type of estimate is done during different stages of the project life cycle, and each
has a different level of accuracy. Several tools and techniques can help you develop cost
estimates, including analogous estimating, bottom-up estimating, parametric estimating,
and computerized tools. Function point analysis can also be used to estimate software
development costs.
Determining the budget involves allocating costs to individual work items over time. It is
important to understand how particular organizations prepare budgets so estimates are made
accordingly.
Controlling costs includes monitoring cost performance, reviewing changes, and notifying
project stakeholders of changes related to costs. Many basic accounting and finance principles
relate to project cost management. Earned value management is an important method used
for measuring project performance. Earned value management integrates scope, cost, and
schedule information. Project portfolio management allows organizations to collect and control
an entire suite of projects or investments as one set of interrelated activities.
Several software products can assist with project cost management. Project 2016 has
many cost management features, including earned value management. Enterprise project
management software and portfolio management software can help managers evaluate data
on multiple projects.
Be sure to consider how project cost management can differ in agile/adaptive
environments.
Discussion Questions
1. Discuss why many IT professionals may overlook project cost management and how this
might affect the ability to complete projects within budget.
2. Explain some of the basic principles of cost management, such as profits, life cycle costs,
tangible and intangible costs and benefits, direct and indirect costs, and reserves.
3. What is meant by a sunk cost? Give examples of typical sunk costs for an IT project as well
as examples from your personal life. Why is it difficult for people to ignore them when they
should?
Chapter 7
318
4. Give examples of when you would prepare rough order of magnitude (ROM), budgetary,
and definitive cost estimates for an IT project. Give an example of how you would use
each of the following techniques for creating a cost estimate: analogous, parametric,
and bottom-up.
5. Explain what happens during the process to determine the project budget.
6. Explain how earned value management (EVM) can be used to control costs and measure
project performance, and explain why you think it is not used more often. What are some
general rules of thumb for deciding if numbers for cost variance, schedule variance, cost
performance index, and schedule performance index are good or bad?
7. What is project portfolio management? Can project managers use it with earned value
management?
8. Describe several types of software that project managers can use to support project cost
management.
9. How is project cost management different when using an agile approach?
Quick Quiz
1. Accountants usually define
as a resource sacrificed or foregone to achieve
a specific objective.
a.
money
b.
liability
c.
trade
d.
cost
2. What is the main goal of project cost management?
a.
To complete a project for as little cost as possible
b.
To complete a project within an approved budget
c.
To provide truthful and accurate cost information on projects
d.
To ensure that an organization's money is used wisely
3. Which of the following is not an output of the project cost management process called
estimating costs, according to the PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition?
a.
Cost estimates
b.
A cost baseline
c.
Basis of estimates
d.
Project documents updates
4. If a company loses $5 for every $100 in revenue for a certain product, what is the profit
margin for that product?
a.
25 percent
b.
5 percent
Project Cost Management
319
c.
2$5
d.
$5
5.
reserves allow for future situations that are unpredictable.
a.
Contingency
b.
Financial
c.
Management
d.
Baseline
6. You are preparing a cost estimate for a building based on its location, purpose, number of
square feet, and other characteristics. What cost-estimating technique are you using?
a.
Parametric
b.
Analogous
c.
Bottom-up
d.
Top-down
7.
involves allocating the project cost estimate to individual material resources
or work items over time.
a.
Reserve analysis
b.
Life cycle costing
c.
Project cost budgeting
d.
Earned value analysis
8.
is a project performance measurement technique that integrates scope,
time, and cost data.
a.
Reserve analysis
b.
Life cycle costing
c.
Project cost budgeting
d.
Earned value management
9. If the actual cost for a WBS item is $1,500 and its earned value is $2,000, what is its cost
variance, and is it under or over budget?
a.
The cost variance is 2$500, which is over budget.
b.
The cost variance is 2$500, which is under budget.
c.
The cost variance is $500, which is over budget.
d.
The cost variance is $500, which is under budget.
10. If a project is halfway completed, its schedule performance index is 110 percent, and its cost
performance index is 95 percent, how is it progressing?
a.
It is ahead of schedule and under budget.
b.
It is ahead of schedule and over budget.
c.
It is behind schedule and under budget.
d.
It is behind schedule and over budget.
Chapter 7
320
Quick Quiz Answers
1. d; 2. b; 3. b; 4. a; 5. c; 6. a; 7. c; 8. d; 9. d; 10. b
Exercises
1. Given the following information for a one-year project, answer the following questions. Recall
that PV is the planned value, EV is the earned value, AC is the actual cost, and BAC is the
budget at completion.

PV
$22,000
EV
$20,000
AC
$25,000
BAC
$120,000
5
5
5
5
a. What is the cost variance, schedule variance, cost performance index (CPI), and
schedule performance index (SPI) for the project?
b. How is the project doing? Is it ahead of schedule or behind schedule? Is it under budget
or over budget?
c. Use the CPI to calculate the estimate at completion (EAC) for this project. Is the project
performing better or worse than planned?
d. Use the SPI to estimate how long it will take to finish this project.
e. Sketch the earned value chart for this project, using Figure 7-6 as a guide.
2. Create a cost estimate and model for building a new, state-of-the-art multimedia classroom
for your organization within the next six months. The classroom should include 20 high-end
personal computers with appropriate software for your organization, a network server, Internet
access for all machines, an instructor station, and a projection system. Be sure to include
personnel costs associated with the project management for this project. Document the
assumptions you made in preparing the estimate and provide explanations for key numbers.
3. Research using the cost management features of Project 2016 or other software tools,
including project portfolio management software. Also review the project cost management
section of Appendix A. Ask three people in different IT organizations that use project
management software if they use the cost management features of the software and in what
ways. Write a brief report on what you learned from your research.
4. Read the free ebook Cost Estimating in an Agile Development Environment by Alvin
Alexander, which discusses estimating software costs. Find one or two other references on
ways to measure software development costs. In your own words, write a two-page paper
that explains how to estimate software development costs using at least two different
approaches.
5. Create a spreadsheet to calculate your projected total costs, total revenues, and total profits
for giving a seminar on cost estimating. Make the following assumptions:
You will charge $600 per person for a two-day class.
You estimate that 30 people will attend the class, but you want to change this input.
Project Cost Management
321
Your fixed costs include $500 total to rent a room for both days, setup fees of $400 for
registration, and $300 for designing a postcard for advertising.
You will not include your labor costs for this estimate, but you estimate that you will
spend at least 150 hours developing materials, managing the project, and giving the
actual class. You would like to know what your time is worth given different scenarios.
You will order 5,000 postcards, mail 4,000, and distribute the rest to friends and
colleagues.
Your variable costs include the following:
a. $5 per person for registration plus 4 percent of the class fee per person to handle
credit card processing; assume that everyone pays by credit card
b. $.40 per postcard for printing if you order 5,000 or more
c. $.35 per postcard for mailing and postage
d. $25 per person for beverages and lunch
e. $30 per person for class handouts

Be sure to have input cells for any variables that might change, such as the cost of postage
and handouts. Calculate your profits based on each of the following numbers of people
who might attend: 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, and 60. In addition, calculate what your time would be
worth per hour based on the number of students. Try to use the Excel data table feature to
show the profits based on the number of students. If you are unfamiliar with data tables, just
repeat the calculations for each possibility of 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, and 60 students. Print your
results on one page, highlighting the profits for each scenario and what your time is worth.
6. Read the study by Lingguang Song cited in the End Notes or a similar study about the use
of EVM. Summarize the findings and your opinions of the study and the use of EVM. Why do
you think it is still used mostly on large government or defense projects?
Running Case
You and your team are continuing your work on the Global Treps Project. Your project sponsor,
Dr. K., has asked you to refine the existing cost estimate for the project so you can evaluate
supplier bids and have a solid cost baseline for evaluating project performance. Recall that
your schedule and cost goals are to complete the project in six months for under $120,000.
You planned to use up to $50,000 total to pay yourself and your team members, and your initial
estimates were $30,000 for travel expenses, $20,000 for hardware and software, and $20,000 for
organizing four events, including consultants, legal/business fees, etc.
Tasks
1. Prepare and print a one-page cost model for the project, similar to the model provided in
Figure 7-2. Use the following WBS or the WBS you developed in Chapter 5, and be sure to
document your assumptions in preparing the cost model. Assume a labor rate of $20/hour
for yourself (the project manager) and team members (Kim, Ashok, and Alfreda). You will pay
Chapter 7
322
Bobby, your IT guy, $30/hour. The project will fund refreshments for the four shark tank like
events and prizes for the winners, at a cost of $1,000 for each event.
1.1 Project management
1.2 Hardware (3 laptops and Internet access for Kim, Ashok, and Alfreda)
1.3 Software
1.3.1 Outsourced
1.3.1.1 Domain name and site hosting
1.3.1.2 Donation acceptance feature of website
1.3.1.3 Video creation for website
1.3.2 In-house Development
1.3.2.1 Guidelines and templates for events
1.3.2.2 Acceptance of ideas for needed new products or services
1.3.2.3 Custom site for 20 events
1.3.3 Testing
1.4 Business Plan
1.4.1 Internal labor
1.4.2 Legal information/assistance
1.5 Travel
1.6 Events
1.6.1 Internal labor
1.6.2 Consultant labor
1.6.3 Refreshments
1.6.4 Prizes
2. Using the cost model you created in Task 1, prepare a cost baseline by allocating the costs
by WBS for each month of the project.
3. Assume that you have completed three months of the project. The BAC was $120,000 for
this six-month project. You can also make the following assumptions:

5
5
5
PV
$60,000
EV
$55,000
AC
$50,000
a. What is the cost variance, schedule variance, cost performance index (CPI), and
schedule performance index (SPI) for the project?
b. How is the project doing? Is it ahead of schedule or behind schedule? Is it under budget
or over budget?
c. Use the CPI to calculate the estimate at completion (EAC) for this project. Is the project
performing better or worse than planned?
Project Cost Management
323
d. Use the SPI to estimate how long it will take to finish this project.
e. Sketch an earned value chart using the information from your answers to parts a through
d. Use Figure 7-6 as a guide.
Key Terms
actual cost (AC)
analogous estimates
baseline
bottom-up estimates
budget at completion (BAC)
budgetary estimate
cash flow analysis
contingency reserves
cost baseline
cost performance index (CPI)
cost variance (CV)
definitive estimate
direct costs
earned value (EV)
earned value management (EVM)
estimate at completion (EAC)
function points
indirect costs
intangible costs or benefits
known unknowns
learning curve theory
life cycle costing
management reserves
overrun
parametric estimating
planned value (PV)
profit margin
profits
project cost management
rate of performance (RP)
reserves
rough order of magnitude (ROM) estimate
schedule performance index (SPI)
schedule variance (SV)
sunk cost
tangible costs or benefits
three-point estimate
to-complete performance index (TCPI)
top-down estimates
unknown unknowns
Endnotes

1 Bent Flyvbjerg and Alexander Budzier, "Why Your IT Project May Be Riskier Than You
Think," Harvard Business Review, hbr.org/2011/09/why-your-it-project-may-be-riskier-than-
you-think (September 2011).

2 Ibid.

3 Paul McDougall, "U.K. Health System IT Upgrade Called a 'Disaster,' " InformationWeek,
www.informationweek.com/uk-health-system-it-upgrade-called-a-disaster/d/d-id/1043912?
(June 5, 2006).
Chapter 7
324

4 Jeremy Kirk, "Datacenter Failure Pinches U.K. Health Service," IDG News Service, www
.infoworld.com/article/2655787/database/datacenter-failure-pinches-uk-health-service.html
(August 1, 2006).

5 Press Association, "U.K. Health Service to Dismantle Nationwide Health IT Program,"
eHealth, www.ehealth.eletsonline.com/2011/10/uk-health-service-to-dismantle-nationwide-
health-it-program/ (September 23, 2011).

6 Charles T. Horngren, George Foster, and Srikanti M. Datar, Cost Accounting, Eighth edition
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1994).

7 Project Management Institute, "Pulse of the Profession: Capturing the Value of Project
Management," www.pmi.org/~/media/PDF/learning/pulse-of-the-profession-2015.ashx
(February 2015), p. 18.

8 Dominique Levin, "Facebook's 20 Minute Downtime Costs More Than $500,000," AgileOne,
https://blog.agilone.com/facebooks-20-minute-downtime-costs-them-more-than-500000
(September 3, 2014).

9 Kelly Clay, "Amazon.com Goes Down, Loses $66,240 Per Minute," Forbes, www.
forbes.com/sites/kellyclay/2013/08/19/amazon-com-goes-down-loses-66240-per-
minute/#154a62ae495c (August 19, 2013).

10 Alan Shimel, "The real cost of downtime," Blogs, Business of DevOps, devops
.com/2015/02/11/real-cost-downtime/ (February 11, 2015).

11 IDC, DevOps and the Cost of Downtime: Fortune 1000 Best Practice Metrics Quantified
(2014).

12 Dawn Kawamoto, "Dell's Green Goal for 2008," Tech Culture (blog), CNET, https://www.
cnet.com/news/dells-green-goal-for-2008/ (September 27, 2007).

13 Dell, FY 2014 Corporate Responsibility Report: A Progress Report on Our 2020 Legacy of
Good Plan, i.dell.com/sites/doccontent/corporate/corp-comm/en/Documents/fy14-crreport
.pdf (2014).

14 Tom DeMarco, Controlling Software Projects (New York: Yourdon Press, 1982).

15 International Function Point User Group, "What Are Function Points-Fact Sheet,"
www.ifpug.org/publications-products/what-are-function-points-fact-sheet (accessed
April 28, 2015).

16 Alvin Alexander, Cost Estimating in an Agile Development Environment, alvinalexander
.com/downloads/Book3-EstimatingInAnAgileEnvironment.pdf (2014).

17 David Longstreet, "Function Points?," www.softwaremetrics.com/files/OneHour.pdf
(accessed March 13, 2015), p. 16.

18 Brenda Taylor, P2 Senior Project Manager, P2 Project Management Solutions,
Johannesburg, South Africa, E-mail (2004).

19 Daniel M. Brandon, Jr., "Implementing Earned Value Easily and Effectively," Project
Management Journal (June 1998) 29 (2), pp. 11-18.

20 Quentin W. Fleming and Joel M. Koppelman, Earned Value Project Management, Third
Edition (NewTown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, 2006).
Project Cost Management
325

21 Lingguang Song, Earned Value Management: A Global and Cross-Industry Perspective on
Current EVM Practice (NewTown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, 2010).

22 Scott Berinato, "Do the Math," CIO Magazine (October 1, 2001), p. 52.

23 Project Management Institute, Inc. Pulse of the Profession In-Depth Report: Portfolio
Management (2012).

24 Innotas Press Release, "Planview recognized as a Leader in 2017 Gartner Magic Quadrant
for Project Portfolio Management, Worldwide," Innotas (June 7, 2017).

25 Planisware Press Release, "Leaders in Innovation Divulge Best Practices at Planisware's
User Summit," https://www.planisware.com/event/leaders-innovation-divulge-best-
practices-planiswares-user-summit (May 15, 2014).

26 Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge
(PMBOK Guide) - Sixth Edition (2017), p. 234.

27 Tamara Sulaiman and Hubert Smits, "Measuring Integrated Progress on Agile Software
Development Projects," Methods & Tools (Fall 2017).

C h a p t e r 8
Project Quality
Management
L e a r n i n g O b j e c t i v e s
After reading this chapter, you will be able to:

Develop a justification for project quality management and its importance
in achieving project success for information technology (IT) products and
services

Define project quality management and understand how quality relates
to various aspects of IT projects

Describe quality management planning and how quality and scope man-
agement are related

Discuss the importance of managing quality and quality assurance

Explain the main outputs of the quality control process

List and describe the tools and techniques for quality control, such as the
Seven Basic Tools of Quality, statistical sampling, Six Sigma, and testing

Summarize the contributions of noteworthy quality experts to modern
quality management

Describe how leadership, the cost of quality, organizational influences,
expectations, cultural differences, and maturity models relate to improv-
ing quality in IT projects

Discuss how software can assist in project quality management

Discuss considerations for agile/adaptive environments
Chapter 8
328
The Importance of Project Quality Management
Most people have heard jokes about how cars would work if they followed a development
history similar to that of computers. A well-known Internet joke goes as follows:
At the COMDEX computer exposition, Bill Gates, the founder and CEO of Microsoft Cor-
poration, stated: "If General Motors had kept up with technology like the computer indus-
try has, we would all be driving $25 cars that got 1,000 miles to the gallon." In response
to Gates' comments, General Motors issued a press release stating: "If GM had developed
technology like Microsoft, we would all be driving cars with the following characteristics:

For no reason whatsoever your car would crash twice a day.

Every time they repainted the lines on the road, you would have to buy a
new car.

Macintosh would make a car that was powered by the sun, reliable, five times as
fast, and twice as easy to drive, but would run on only five percent of the roads.

New seats would force everyone to have the same size hips.

The airbag system would say 'Are you sure?' before going off.

Occasionally, for no reason whatsoever, your car would lock you out and
refuse to let you in until you simultaneously lifted the door handle, turned
the key, and grabbed hold of the radio antenna."1
O p e n i n g C a s e
A large medical instruments company just hired Scott Daniels, a senior consultant
from a large consulting firm, to lead a project to resolve the quality problems with the
company's new Executive Information System (EIS). A team of internal programmers
and analysts worked with several company executives to develop this new system.
Many executives were hooked on the new, user-friendly EIS. They loved the way the
system allowed them to track sales of various medical instruments quickly and easily by
product, country, hospital, and sales representative. After successfully testing the new
EIS with several executives, the company decided to make the system available to all
levels of management.
Unfortunately, several quality problems developed with the new EIS after a few
months of operation. People complained that they could not get into the Web-based
system. The system started going down a couple of times a month, and the response time
was reportedly getting slower. Users complained when they could not access information
within a few seconds. Several people kept forgetting how to log in to the system, thus
increasing the number of calls to the company's help desk. There were complaints
that some of the reports in the system gave inconsistent information. How could a
summary report show totals that were not consistent with a detailed report on the same
information? The executive sponsor of the EIS wanted the problems fixed quickly and
accurately, so he decided to hire an expert in quality from outside the company whom
he knew from past projects. Scott Daniels' job was to lead a team of people from both the
medical instruments company and his own firm to identify and resolve quality-related
issues with the EIS and to develop a plan to help prevent quality problems on future
projects.
Project Quality Management
329
Most people simply accept poor quality from many IT products. So what if your
computer crashes a couple of times a month? Just make sure you back up your data. So
what if you cannot log in to the corporate intranet or the Internet right now? Just try
a little later when it is less busy. So what if the latest update of your word-processing
software has several known bugs? You like the software's new features, and all new
software has bugs. Is quality a real problem with IT projects?
Yes, it is! IT is not just a luxury available in some homes, schools, or offices.
Companies throughout the world provide employees with access to computers. The
majority of people in the United States use the Internet, and usage in other countries
continues to grow rapidly. Many aspects of our daily lives depend on high-quality
IT products. Food is produced and distributed with the aid of computers; cars have
computer chips to track performance; children use computers to help them learn in
school; corporations depend on technology for many business functions; and millions of
people rely on technology for entertainment and personal communications. Computing
everywhere and the Internet of things, as described in Chapter 1, are expanding our
reliance on IT to smart appliances and devices (TVs, refrigerators, thermostats, etc.),
pay-as-you-go services, and much more. Many IT projects develop mission-critical
systems that are used in life-and-death situations, such as navigation systems on
aircraft and computer components built into medical equipment. Financial institutions
and their customers also rely on high-quality information systems. Customers get
very upset when systems provide inaccurate financial data or reveal information to
unauthorized users that could lead to identity theft. When one of these systems does
not function correctly, it is much more than a slight inconvenience, as described in the
following "What Went Wrong?" examples.
W h a t W e n t W r o n g ?

In 1981, a small timing difference caused by a computer program change
created a 1-in-67 chance that the space shuttle's five onboard computers would
not synchronize. The error caused a launch abort.2

In 1986, two hospital patients died after receiving fatal doses of radiation
from a Therac 25 machine. A software problem caused the machine to ignore
calibration data.3

After reports of "pervasive and persistent misconduct," the U.S. Federal
Reserve forced Wells Fargo bank to cease any business expansion until they
proved they cleaned up their act. "A new CEO and management team were
brought in, and the old regime lost millions of dollars in docked pay."4

In 2018, CEO Mark Zuckerburg responded to a data break by writing in a
Facebook post. "We have a responsibility to protect your data, and if we can't
then we don't deserve to serve you. I've been working to understand exactly
what happened and how to make sure this doesn't happen again."5
Chapter 8
330
Before you can improve the quality of IT projects or any type of project, it is impor-
tant to understand the basic concepts of project quality management.
What is Project Quality Management?
Project quality management is a difficult knowledge area to define. The International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) defines quality as "the totality of characteristics
of an entity that bear on its ability to satisfy stated or implied needs" (ISO8042:1994)
or "the degree to which a set of inherent characteristics fulfils requirements"
(ISO9000:2000). Many people spent many hours developing these definitions, yet they are
still vague. Other experts define quality based on conformance to requirements and fitness
for use. Conformance to requirements means that the project's processes and products
meet written specifications. For example, if the project scope statement requires delivery
of 100 computers with specific processors and memory, you could easily check whether
suitable computers had been delivered. Fitness for use means that a product can be used
as it was intended. If these computers were delivered without monitors or keyboards and
were left in boxes on the customer's shipping dock, the customer might not be satisfied
because the computers would not be fit for use. The customer may have assumed that the
delivery included monitors and keyboards, unpacking the computers, and installation so
they would be ready to use.
The purpose of project quality management is to ensure that the project will satisfy
the needs for which it was undertaken. Recall that project management involves meet-
ing or exceeding stakeholder needs and expectations. The project team must develop
good relationships with key stakeholders, especially the main customer for the project,
to understand what quality means to them. After all, the customer ultimately decides if
quality is acceptable. Many technical projects fail because the project team focuses only
on meeting the written requirements for the main products being created and ignores
other stakeholder needs and expectations for the project. For example, the project team
should know what successfully delivering 100 computers means to the customer.
Quality, therefore, must be on an equal level with project scope, time, and cost. If a
project's stakeholders are not satisfied with the quality of the project management or the
resulting products of the project, the project team will need to adjust scope, time, and cost
to satisfy the stakeholder. Meeting only written requirements for scope, time, and cost is
not sufficient. To achieve stakeholder satisfaction, the project team must develop a good
working relationship with all stakeholders and understand their stated or implied needs.
Project quality management involves three main processes:
1. Planning quality management includes identifying which quality
requirements and standards are relevant to the project and how to satisfy
them. Incorporating quality standards into project design is a key part of
quality planning. For an IT project, quality standards might include allowing
for system growth, planning a reasonable response time for a system, or
ensuring that the system produces consistent and accurate information.
Quality standards can also apply to IT services. For example, you can set
standards for how long it should take to get a reply from a help desk or how
long it should take to ship a replacement part for a hardware item under
Project Quality Management
331
warranty. The main outputs of planning quality management are a quality
management plan, quality metrics, project management plan updates,
and project documents updates. A metric is a standard of measurement.
Examples of common metrics include failure rates of products, availability of
goods and services, and customer satisfaction ratings.
2. Managing quality involves translating the quality management plan into exe-
cutable quality activities. These activities must adhere to the organization's
quality policies. The main outputs of this process are quality reports, test and
evaluation documents, change requests, project management plan updates,
and project documents updates.
3. Controlling quality involves monitoring specific project results to ensure that
they are complete, correct, and meet customer expectations. This process is
often associated with the technical tools and techniques of quality manage-
ment, such as Pareto charts, quality control charts, and statistical sampling.
You will learn more about these tools and techniques later in this chapter.
The main outputs of quality control include quality control measurements,
verified deliverables, work performance information, change requests, project
management plan updates, and project documents updates.
Figure 8-1 summarizes the processes, tools and techniques, and outputs of project
quality management.
Planning Quality Management
Project managers today have a vast knowledge base of information related to quality,
and the first step to ensuring project quality management is planning. Planning quality
management implies the ability to anticipate situations and prepare actions that bring
about the desired outcome. The current thrust in modern quality management is the
prevention of defects through a program of selecting the proper materials, training and
indoctrinating people in quality, and planning a process that ensures the appropriate
outcome. In project quality management planning, it is important to identify relevant
quality standards for each unique project and to design quality into the products of the
project and the processes involved in managing the project.
Several tools and techniques are available for planning quality management. For
example, design of experiments is a technique that helps identify which variables have
the most influence on the overall outcome of a process. Understanding which variables
affect outcome is a very important part of quality planning. For example, computer
chip designers might want to determine which combination of materials and equipment
will produce the most reliable chips at a reasonable cost. You can also apply design of
experiments to project management issues such as cost and schedule trade-offs. Junior
programmers or consultants cost less than senior programmers or consultants, but you
cannot expect them to complete the same level of work in the same amount of time. An
appropriately designed experiment to compute project costs and durations for various
combinations of junior and senior programmers or consultants can allow you to determine
an optimal mix of personnel, given limited resources. Refer to the section on the Taguchi
method later in this chapter for more information.
Chapter 8
332
Quality planning also involves communicating the correct actions for ensuring
quality in a format that is understandable and complete. In quality planning for projects,
it is important to describe key factors that directly contribute to meeting the customer's
requirements. Organizational policies related to quality, the particular project's scope
statement and product descriptions, and related standards and regulations are all
important input to the quality planning process.
As mentioned in the discussion of project scope management (see Chapter 5), it is
often difficult to completely understand the performance dimension of IT projects. Even if
the development of hardware, software, and networking technology would stand still for a
while, customers often have difficulty explaining exactly what they want in an IT project.
Important scope aspects of IT projects that affect quality include functionality and fea-
tures, system outputs, performance, and reliability and maintainability.
Figure 8-1  Project quality management overview
8.1 Plan Quality
Management
.1 Inputs
.1 Project charter
.2 Project management plan
.3 Project documents
.4 Enterprise environmental
factors
.5 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Data gathering
.3 Data analysis
.4 Decision making
.5 Data representation
.6 Test and inspection
planning
.7 Meetings
.3 Outputs
.1 Quality management plan
.2 Quality metrics
.3 Project management plan
updates
.4 Project documents updates
8.2 Manage Quality
8.3 Control Quality
Project Quality
Management Overview
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Approved change requests
.4 Deliverables
.5 Work performance data
.6 Enterprise environmental
factors
.7 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Data gathering
.2 Data analysis
.3 Inspection
.4 Testing/product
evaluations
.5 Data representation
.6 Meetings
.3 Outputs
.1 Quality control
measurements
.2 Veriﬁed deliverables
.3 Work performance
information
.4 Change requests
.5 Project management plan
updates
.6 Project documents updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Data gathering
.2 Data analysis
.3 Decision making
.4 Data representation
.5 Audits
.6 Design for X
.7 Problem solving
.8 Quality improvement
methods
.3 Outputs
.1 Quality reports
.2 Test and evaluation
documents
.3 Change requests
.4 Project management plan
updates
.5 Project documents updates
Source: PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition. Project Management Institute, Inc. (2017). Copyright and
all rights reserved. Material from this publication has been reproduced with permission of PMI.
Project Quality Management
333

Functionality is the degree to which a system performs its intended function.
Features are the system's special characteristics that appeal to users. It is
important to clarify what functions and features the system must perform,
and what functions and features are optional. In the EIS example in the
chapter's opening case, the mandatory functionality of the system might
allow users to track sales of specific medical instruments by predetermined
categories such as the product group, country, hospital, and sales
representative. Mandatory features might be a graphical user interface with
icons, menus, and online help.

System outputs are the screens and reports the system generates. It is
important to define clearly what the screens and reports look like for a
system. Can the users easily interpret these outputs? Can users get all of the
reports they need in a suitable format?

Performance addresses how well a product or service performs the
customer's intended use. To design a system with high-quality performance,
project stakeholders must address many issues. What volumes of data
and transactions should the system be capable of handling? How many
simultaneous users should the system be designed to handle? What is the
projected growth rate in the number of users? What type of equipment must
the system run on? How fast must the response time be for different aspects
of the system under different circumstances? For the EIS in the opening
case, several of the quality problems appear to relate to performance issues.
The system is failing a couple of times a month, and users are unsatisfied
with the response time. The project team may not have had specific
performance requirements or tested the system under the right conditions
to deliver the expected performance. Buying faster hardware might address
these performance issues. Another performance problem that might be more
difficult to fix is that some reports are generating inconsistent results. This
could be a software quality problem that is difficult and costly to correct
because the system is already in operation.

Reliability is the ability of a product or service to perform as expected under
normal conditions. In discussing reliability for IT projects, many people use
the term IT service management.

Maintainability addresses the ease of performing maintenance on a product.
Most IT products cannot reach 100 percent reliability, but stakeholders must
define their expectations. For the EIS, what are the normal conditions for
operating the system? Should reliability tests be based on 100 people access-
ing the system at once and running simple queries? Maintenance for the EIS
might include uploading new data into the system or performing mainte-
nance procedures on the system hardware and software. Are the users willing
to have the system be unavailable several hours a week for system mainte-
nance? Providing help desk support could also be a maintenance function.
How fast a response do users expect for help desk support? How often can
users tolerate system failure? Are the stakeholders willing to pay more for
higher reliability and fewer failures?
Chapter 8
334
These aspects of project scope are just a few of the requirement issues related to
quality management planning. Project managers and their teams need to consider all
of these project scope issues in determining quality goals for the project. The main
customers for the project must also realize their role in defining the most critical quality
needs for the project and constantly communicate these needs and expectations to the
project team. Because most IT projects involve requirements that are not set in stone, it
is important for all project stakeholders to work together to balance the quality, scope,
time, and cost dimensions of the project. Project managers, however, are ultimately
responsible for quality management on their projects.
Project managers should be familiar with basic quality terms, standards, and
resources. For example, the ISO provides information based on inputs from 163 different
countries. The ISO has an extensive website (www.iso.org), which is the source of ISO
9000 and more than 22,000 international standards for business, government, and society
as of January 2018. If you're curious where the acronym came from, the word "iso" comes
from the Greek language, meaning "equal." IEEE also provides many standards related to
quality and has detailed information on its website (www.ieee.org).
Managing Quality
It is one thing to develop a plan for ensuring the quality of a project; it is another to
ensure delivery of high-quality products and services. The term quality assurance is often
used to describe the activities related to satisfying the relevant quality standards for a
project. Managing quality includes all of the quality assurance activities plus product
design and process improvements. Important inputs for managing quality are the quality
management plan, project documents, and organizational process assets.
Many companies understand the importance of managing quality and have entire
departments dedicated to it. They have detailed processes in place to make sure their
products and services conform to various quality requirements. They also know they
must offer those products and services at competitive prices. To be successful in today's
competitive business environment, good companies develop their own best practices and
evaluate other organizations' best practices to continuously improve the way they do
business. The Japanese word for improvement or change for the better is kaizen; a kaizen
approach has been used in many organizations since the end of World War II. Another
popular term, lean, involves evaluating processes to maximize customer value while
minimizing waste. Kanban, as described briefly in Chapter 2, is a technique often used
in lean. See the What Went Right? section on the next page for more information, and
consult other texts, articles, and websites for more detailed information on kaizen, lean,
kanban, and other aspects of quality assurance.
Several tools used in quality planning can also be used in managing quality. Design
of experiments, as described under quality planning, can also help ensure and improve
product quality. Benchmarking generates ideas for quality improvements by comparing
specific project practices or product characteristics to those of other projects or products
within or outside the performing organization. For example, if a competitor has an EIS
with an average downtime of only one hour a week, that might be a benchmark for which
to strive.
Project Quality Management
335
An important tool for managing quality is a quality audit. A quality audit is a structured
review of specific quality management activities that help identify lessons learned and
that could improve performance on current or future projects. In-house auditors or third
parties with expertise in specific areas can perform quality audits; these quality audits can
be scheduled or random. Industrial engineers often perform quality audits by helping to
design specific quality metrics for a project and then applying and analyzing the metrics
throughout the project. For example, the Northwest Airlines Resnet project (which is
available on the Companion website for this text) provides an excellent example of using
quality audits to emphasize the main goals of a project and then track progress in reaching
those goals. The main objective of the Resnet project was to develop a new reservation
system to increase direct airline ticket sales and reduce the time it took for sales agents
to handle customer calls. The measurement techniques for monitoring these goals helped
Resnet's project manager and project team supervise various aspects of the project by
focusing on meeting those goals. Measuring progress toward increasing direct sales and
reducing call times also helped the project manager justify continued investments in Resnet.
Controlling Quality
Many people only think of quality control when they think of quality management,
perhaps because there are many popular tools and techniques in this area. Before you
learn about these tools and techniques, it is important to distinguish controlling quality
from planning and managing quality.
W h a t W e n t R i g h t ?
In 2005 David J. Anderson, a founder of the Agile movement and author of several books,
visited Tokyo's Imperial Palace gardens during a trip to Japan. He noticed that kanban
was used at the gardens to manage the flow of visitors and realized that it could be
applied to many processes, including software development.
Kanban uses five core properties:
1. Visual workflow
2. Limit work-in-progress
3. Measure and manage flow
4. Make process policies explicit
5. Use models to recognize improvement opportunities
In his book Kanban, Anderson explains that the application of kanban is different for
every team. Visitors to his company saw that no set of kanban boards were alike, and all
of their teams used a different process to develop software. Anderson explains that kanban
requires some type of process to already be in place, and it is used to incrementally
improve the process. It gives teams permission to be different. "Each team's situation is
different. They evolve their process to fit their context . . . . The simple act of limiting
work-in-progress with kanban encourages higher quality and greater performance."6
Chapter 8
336
Although one of the main goals of quality control is to improve quality, the main
outcomes of this process are acceptance decisions, rework, and process adjustments.

Acceptance decisions determine if the products or services produced as part
of the project will be accepted or rejected. If they are accepted, they are
considered to be validated deliverables. If project stakeholders reject some
of the project's products or services, there must be rework. For example, the
executive who sponsored development of the EIS in the chapter's opening case
was obviously not satisfied with the system and hired an outside consultant,
Scott Daniels, to lead a team to address and correct the quality problems.

Rework is action taken to bring rejected items into compliance with product
requirements, specifications, or other stakeholder expectations. Rework
often results in requested changes and validated defect repair, and it results
from recommended defect repair or corrective or preventive actions. Rework
can be very expensive, so the project manager must strive to do a good job
of quality planning and quality assurance to avoid this need. Because the EIS
did not meet all of the stakeholders' expectations for quality in the opening
case, the medical instruments company was spending additional money
for rework.

Process adjustments correct or prevent further quality problems based on
quality control measurements. Process adjustments often result in updates to
organization process assets and the project management plan. For example,
Scott Daniels, the consultant in the opening case, might recommend that the
medical instruments company purchase a faster server for the EIS to correct
the response-time problems. This change would require changes to the proj-
ect management plan because it would require more project-related work.
The company also hired Scott to develop a plan to help prevent future IT
project quality problems.
Tools and Techniques for Quality Control
Quality control includes many general tools and techniques. This section describes the
Seven Basic Tools of Quality, statistical sampling, and Six Sigma and discusses how they
can be applied to IT projects. The section concludes with a discussion of testing, because
IT projects use testing extensively to ensure quality.
The designation of the Seven Basic Tools of Quality arose in postwar Japan,
supposedly inspired by the seven famous weapons of Benkei. The seven tools include the
following:
1. Cause-and-effect diagrams trace complaints about quality problems back to
the responsible production operations. In other words, they help you find
the root cause of a problem. They are also known as fishbone or Ishikawa
diagrams, named after their creator, Kaoru Ishikawa. You can also use the
technique known as the 5 whys, in which you repeatedly ask the question
"Why?" to help peel away the layers of symptoms that can lead to the root
Project Quality Management
337
cause of a problem. (Using five questions is a good rule of thumb, although
other numbers can be used.) These symptoms can be branches on the cause-
and-effect diagram.
Figure 8-2 provides an example of a cause-and-effect diagram that Scott
Daniels, the consultant in the opening case, might create to discover why
users cannot log in to the EIS. Notice that it resembles the skeleton of a fish,
hence the name fishbone diagram. This diagram lists the main areas that
could be the cause of the problem: the EIS system's hardware, the user's
hardware or software, or the user's training. The figure describes two of these
areas, the individual user's hardware and training, in more detail.
Using the 5 whys, you could first ask why users cannot get into the
system, then why they keep forgetting their passwords, why they did not
reset their passwords, and why they did not check a box to save a password.
The root cause of the problem would have a significant impact on actions
taken to solve the problem. If many users could not get into the system
because their computers did not have enough memory, the solution might be
to upgrade memory for those computers. If many users could not get into the
system because they forgot their passwords, there might be a much quicker,
less expensive solution.
2. A control chart is a graphic display of data that illustrates the results of a
process over time. Control charts allow you to determine whether a process
is in control or out of control. When a process is in control, any variations
in the results of the process are created by random events. Processes that
are in control do not need to be adjusted. When a process is out of control,
Figure 8-2  Sample cause-and-effect diagram
Problem: Users
cannot get into
system
Training
User did not
check box to
save password
Not
enough
memory
User did not
reset password
User keeps
forgetting
password
System Hardware
Processor
too slow
Software
User's Hardware
Not enough
hard disk
storage
Chapter 8
338
variations in the results of the process are caused by nonrandom events.
When a process is out of control, you need to identify the causes of those
nonrandom events and adjust the process to correct or eliminate them.
Figure 8-3 provides an example of a control chart for a process that man-
ufactures 12-inch wood rulers by machines on an assembly line. Each point
on the chart represents a length measurement for a ruler that comes off the
assembly line. The customer has specified that all rulers it purchases must be
between 11.90 and 12.10 inches long, or 12 inches plus or minus 0.10 inches.
The scale on the vertical axis goes from 11.90, the lower specification limit,
to 12.10, the upper specification limit. The lower and upper control limits
on the quality control chart are 11.91 and 12.09 inches, respectively. This
means the manufacturing process is designed to produce rulers between
11.91 and 12.09 inches long.
Looking for and analyzing patterns in process data is an important part
of quality control. You can use quality control charts and the seven run rule
to look for patterns in data. The seven run rule states that if seven data
points in a row are all below the mean or above the mean, or are all increas-
ing or decreasing, then the process needs to be examined for nonrandom
problems.
In Figure 8-3, data points that violate the seven run rule are marked
with stars. Note that you include the first point in a series of points that are
all increasing or decreasing. In the ruler manufacturing process, these data
points may indicate that a calibration device needs adjustment. For example,
the machine that cuts the wood for the rulers might need to be adjusted or
the blade on the machine might need to be replaced.
Figure 8-3  Sample control chart
12.10
Time dimension
12.06
12.02
11.98
11.94
11.90
Inches
12.08
12.04
12.00
11.96
11.92
Mean
Upper Control Limit 12.09
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Upper Spec Limit 12.10
Lower Control
Limit 11.91
Lower Spec
Limit 11.90
Denotes violation of 7 run rule
Project Quality Management
339
3. A checksheet is used to collect and analyze data. It is sometimes called
a tally sheet or checklist, depending on its format. Figure 8-4 provides a
sample checksheet that Scott Daniels could use to track the media source of
complaints about the EIS. Note that tally marks are used to enter each data
occurrence manually. In this example, most complaints arrive via text mes-
sage, and there are more complaints on Monday and Tuesday than on other
days of the week. This information might be useful in improving the process
for handling complaints.
4. A scatter diagram helps to show if there is a relationship between two vari-
ables. The closer data points are to a diagonal line, the more closely the
two variables are related. For example, Figure 8-5 provides a sample scatter
diagram that Scott Daniels might create to compare user satisfaction ratings
of the EIS system to the age of respondents to see if there is a relationship.
Scott might find that younger users are less satisfied with the system, for
example, and make decisions based on that finding.
Figure 8-4  Sample checksheet
E-mail
Text
Phone call
Total
System Complaints
11
10
8
6
7
3
12
29
8
49
4
Day
Source
Monday
Tuesday Wednesday Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Total
Figure 8-5  Sample scatter diagram
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Age of Respondent
User Satisfaction Rating
Chapter 8
340
5. A histogram is a bar graph of a distribution of variables. Each bar represents
an attribute or characteristic of a problem or situation, and the height of the
bar represents its frequency. For example, Scott Daniels might ask the Help
Desk to create a histogram to show how many total complaints they received
each week about the EIS system. Figure 8-6 shows a sample histogram.
6. A Pareto chart is a histogram that can help you identify and prioritize
problem areas. The variables described by the histogram are ordered by fre-
quency of occurrence. Pareto charts help you identify the vital few contribu-
tors that account for most quality problems in a system. Pareto analysis is
sometimes referred to as the 80-20 rule, meaning that 80 percent of problems
are often due to 20 percent of the causes.
For example, suppose there was a detailed history of user complaints
about the EIS. The project team could create a Pareto chart based on that
data, as shown in Figure 8-7.
Notice that login problems are the most frequent user complaint, fol-
lowed by the system locking up, the system being too slow, the system being
hard to use, and the reports being inaccurate. The first complaint accounts
for 55 percent of the total complaints. The first and second complaints
together account for almost 80 percent of the total complaints. Therefore, the
company should focus on making it easier to log in to the system to improve
quality, because most complaints fall under that category. The company
should also address why the system locks up.
Because Figure 8-7 shows that inaccurate reports are rarely mentioned,
the project manager should investigate who made this complaint before spend-
ing a lot of effort on addressing the problem. The project manager should also
find out if complaints about the system being too slow were actually due to the
user not being able to log in or the system locking up. You can use the template
file for this chart and other charts on the Companion website for this text, and
you can find videos and articles that explain how to create the charts.
Figure 8-6  Sample histogram
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1
2
3
4
5
6
Week
Number of complaints
Project Quality Management
341
7. Flowcharts are graphic displays of the logic and flow of processes that help
you analyze how problems occur and how processes can be improved.
They show activities, decision points, and the order of how information is
processed.
Figure 8-8 provides a simple example of a flowchart that shows the
process a project team might use for accepting or rejecting deliverables.
The American Society for Quality (ASQ) calls this basic quality tool
Figure 8-7  Sample Pareto chart
100
80
60
40
20
0
Log-in
problems
System
locks up
System is
too slow
System is
too hard
to use
Reports
are
inaccurate
Number of complaints this week
90
70
50
30
10
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
90%
70%
50%
30%
10%
Cumulative%
Figure 8-8  Sample flowchart
Deliverable
Acceptance
Request
Route to
appropriate
decision
makers
Accepted?
Sign
approval
section
Notify
requestor
and log in
system
Document
required
additional
work
YES
NO
Chapter 8
342
stratification, a technique that shows data from a variety of sources to see if
a pattern emerges.
In addition to flowcharts, run charts are also used for stratification.
A run chart displays the history and pattern of variation of a process
over time. It is a line chart that shows data points plotted in the order of
occurrence. You can use run charts to perform trend analysis and forecast
future outcomes based on historical results. For example, trend analysis can
help you analyze how many defects have been identified over time and see
if there are trends. Figure 8-9 shows a sample run chart of the number of
defects each month for three different types of defects. You can easily see the
patterns of Defect 1 increasing over time, Defect 2 decreasing the first several
months and then holding steady, and Defect 3 fluctuating each month.
Statistical Sampling
Statistical sampling is a key concept in project quality management. Members of a project
team who focus on quality control must have a strong understanding of statistics, but
other project team members need to understand only the basic concepts. These concepts
include statistical sampling, certainty factor, standard deviation, and variability. Standard
deviation and variability are fundamental concepts for understanding quality control
charts. This section briefly describes these concepts and describes how a project manager
might apply them to IT projects. Refer to statistics texts for additional details.
Statistical sampling involves choosing part of a population of interest for inspection.
For example, suppose that a company wants to develop an electronic data interchange
(EDI) system for handling invoice data from all of its suppliers. Assume also that in
the past year, the company received 50,000 invoices from 200 different suppliers. It
would be very time consuming and expensive to review every invoice to determine data
Figure 8-9  Sample run chart
0
2
Number of defects
4
6
8
10
12
14
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Defect 1
Defect 2
Defect 3
Project Quality Management
343
requirements for the new system. Even if the system developers did review all 200 invoice
forms from the different suppliers, the data might be entered differently on every form.
Statisticians have developed techniques to determine an appropriate sample size when
it is impractical or impossible to study every member of a population. Using statistical
techniques, the system developers might find that 100 invoices would be enough to
determine the data requirements.
The size of the sample depends on how representative you want it to be. A simple
formula for determining sample size is
∗
Sample size
0.25
(certainty factor/acceptable error)2
5
The certainty factor denotes how confident you want to be that the sampled data
includes only variations that naturally exist in the population. You calculate the certainty
factor from tables that are available in statistics books. Table 8-1 shows some commonly
used certainty factors. The acceptable error is related to the desired certainty and is
1 - percent certainty/100. So if you set your desired certainty to 95 percent, then the
acceptable error value is 2
5
1
95/100
.05.
For example, suppose that the developers of the EDI system would accept a
95 percent certainty that a sample of invoices would contain no variation unless it
was present in the population of total invoices. They would then calculate the sample
size as follows:
∗
Sample size
0.25
(1.960/.05)
384
2
5
5
If the developers would accept 90 percent certainty, they would calculate the sample
size as follows:
∗
Sample size
0.25
(1.645/.10)
68
2
5
5
If the developers would accept 80 percent certainty, they would calculate the sample
size as follows:
∗
Sample size
0.25
(1.281/.20)
10
2
5
5
Assume that the developers decide on 90 percent for the certainty factor. Then they
would need to examine 68 invoices to determine the type of data the EDI system would
need to capture. As stated earlier, even if they reviewed all 200 invoices, some data could
be entered differently. Additional means of data collection should be used to ensure that
important user requirements are met.
Desired Certainty
Certainty Factor
95%
1.960
90%
1.645
80%
1.281
Table 8-1  Commonly used certainty factors
Chapter 8
344
Six Sigma
The work of many project quality experts contributed to the development of today's Six
Sigma principles. There has been some confusion in the past few years about the term
Six Sigma. This section summarizes recent information about this important concept
and explains how organizations worldwide use Six Sigma principles to improve quality,
decrease costs, and better meet customer needs.
In their book The Six Sigma Way, authors Peter Pande, Robert Neuman, and
Roland Cavanagh define Six Sigma as "a comprehensive and flexible system for
achieving, sustaining and maximizing business success. Six Sigma is uniquely driven
by close understanding of customer needs, disciplined use of facts, data, and statistical
analysis, and diligent attention to managing, improving, and reinventing business
processes."7
Six Sigma's target for quality is no more than 3.4 defects, errors, or mistakes per
million opportunities. This target number is explained in more detail later in this section.
An organization can apply Six Sigma principles to the design and production of a product,
a help desk, or other customer-service process.
Projects that use Six Sigma principles for quality control normally follow a five-phase
improvement process called DMAIC (pronounced de-MAY-ick), which stands for Define,
Measure, Analyze, Improve, and Control. DMAIC is a systematic, closed-loop process
for continued improvement that is scientific and fact based. The following are brief
descriptions of each phase of the DMAIC improvement process:
1. Define: Define the problem/opportunity, process, and customer requirements.
Important tools used in this phase include a project charter, a description
of customer requirements, process maps, and Voice of the Customer (VOC)
data. Examples of VOC data include complaints, surveys, comments, and
market research that represent the views and needs of the organization's
customers.
2. Measure: Define measures and then collect, compile, and display data.
Measures are defined in terms of defects per opportunity.
3. Analyze: Scrutinize process details to find improvement opportunities.
A project team working on a Six Sigma project, normally referred to as a Six
Sigma team, investigates and verifies data to prove the suspected root causes
of quality problems and substantiates the problem statement. An important
tool in this phase is the fishbone or Ishikawa diagram, described earlier in
this chapter.
4. Improve: Generate solutions and ideas for improving the problem. A final
solution is verified with the project sponsor, and the Six Sigma team develops
a plan to pilot test the solution. The Six Sigma team reviews the results of the
pilot test to refine the solution, if needed, and then implements the solution
where appropriate.
5.
Control: Track and verify the stability of the improvements and the predictability
of the solution. Control charts are one tool used in the control phase.
Project Quality Management
345
How Is Six Sigma Quality Control Unique?
How does using Six Sigma principles differ from using previous quality control initiatives?
Many people remember other quality initiatives from the past few decades, such as Total
Quality Management (TQM) and Business Process Reengineering (BPR). The origins of
many Six Sigma principles and tools are found in these previous initiatives; however,
several new ideas are included in Six Sigma principles that help organizations improve
their competitiveness and bottom-line results:

Using Six Sigma principles is an organization-wide commitment. CEOs, top
managers, and all levels of employees in an organization that embraces Six
Sigma principles have seen remarkable improvements due to its use. There
are often huge training investments, but they pay off as employees practice
Six Sigma principles and produce higher-quality goods and services at
lower costs.

Six Sigma training normally follows the "belt" system, similar to a martial
arts class in which students receive different-color belts for each training
level. In Six Sigma training, those in the Yellow Belt category receive the
minimum level of training, which is normally two to three full days for
project team members who work on Six Sigma projects on a part-time basis.
Those in the Green Belt category usually participate in two to three full
weeks of training. Those in the Black Belt category normally work on Six
Sigma projects full time and attend four to five full weeks of training. Project
managers are often Black Belts. The Master Black Belt category describes
experienced Black Belts who act as technical resources and mentors to
people with lower-level belts.

Organizations that successfully implement Six Sigma principles have the
ability and willingness to adopt two seemingly contrary objectives at
the same time. For example, Six Sigma organizations believe that they can
be creative and rational, focus on the big picture and minute details, reduce
errors and get things done faster, and make customers happy and make a
lot of money. Authors James Collins and Jerry Porras describe this as the
"We can do it all" or "Genius of the And" approach in their book, Built
to Last.8

Six Sigma is not just a program or a discipline to organizations that have
benefited from it. Six Sigma is an operating philosophy that is customer-
focused and strives to drive out waste, raise levels of quality, and improve
financial performance at breakthrough levels. A Six Sigma organization
sets high goals and uses the DMAIC improvement process to achieve
extraordinary quality improvements.
Many organizations do some of what now fits under the definition of Six Sigma, and
many Six Sigma principles are not brand-new. What is new is its ability to bring together
many different themes, concepts, and tools into a coherent management process that can
be used on an organization-wide basis.
Chapter 8
346
Six Sigma and Project Selection and Management
Organizations implement Six Sigma by selecting and managing projects. An important
part of project management is good project selection.
Joseph M. Juran stated, "All improvement takes place project by project, and in no
other way."9 This statement is especially true for Six Sigma projects. Pande, Neuman, and
Cavanagh conducted an informal poll to find out the most critical and most commonly
mishandled activity in launching Six Sigma, and the unanimous answer was project
selection. "It's a pretty simple equation, really: Well-selected and -defined improvement
projects equal better, faster results. The converse equation is also simple: Poorly selected
and defined projects equal delayed results and frustration."10
Organizations must be careful to apply higher quality where it makes sense. An article
in Fortune stated that companies that have implemented Six Sigma have not necessarily
boosted their stock values. Although GE boasted savings of more than $2 billion in
1999 due to its use of Six Sigma, other companies, such as Whirlpool, could not clearly
demonstrate the value of their investments. Why can't all companies benefit from Six
Sigma? Because minimizing defects does not matter if an organization makes a product
that people do not want. As one of Six Sigma's biggest supporters, Mikel Harry, put it,
"I could genetically engineer a Six Sigma goat, but if a rodeo is the marketplace, people
are still going to buy a Four Sigma horse."11
What makes a project a potential Six Sigma project? First, there must be a quality
problem or gap between the current and desired performance. This first criterion does not
apply to many projects, such as building a house, merging two corporations, or providing
an IT infrastructure for a new organization. Second, the project should not have a clearly
understood problem. Third, the solution should not be predetermined, and an optimal
solution should not be apparent.
Once a project is selected as a good candidate for Six Sigma, many project
management concepts, tools, and techniques described in this text come into play. For
example, Six Sigma projects usually have a business case, a project charter, requirements
documents, a schedule, and a budget. Six Sigma projects are done in teams and have
sponsors called champions. There are also project managers, although they are often
called team leaders in Six Sigma organizations. In other words, Six Sigma projects are
simply types of projects that focus on supporting the Six Sigma philosophy by being
customer-focused and striving to drive out waste, raise levels of quality, and improve
financial performance at breakthrough levels.
Six Sigma and Statistics
An important concept in Six Sigma is improving quality by reducing variation. The term
sigma means standard deviation. Standard deviation measures how much variation exists
in a distribution of data. A small standard deviation means that data clusters closely
around the middle of a distribution and there is little variability among the data. A large
standard deviation means that data is spread around the middle of the distribution and
there is relatively greater variability. Statisticians use the Greek symbol σ (sigma) to
represent the standard deviation.
Figure 8-10 provides an example of a normal distribution-a bell-shaped curve that is
symmetrical around the mean or average value of the population (the data being analyzed).
Project Quality Management
347
In any normal distribution, 68.3 percent of the population is within one standard deviation
(1σ) of the mean, 95.5 percent of the population is within two standard deviations (2σ),
and 99.7 percent of the population is within three standard deviations (3σ) of the mean.
Standard deviation is a key factor in determining the acceptable number of defective
units in a population. Table 8-2 illustrates the relationship between sigma, the percentage
of the population within that sigma range, and the number of defective units per billion.
Note that this table shows that being plus or minus six sigma in pure statistical terms
means only two defective units per billion. Why, then, is the target for Six Sigma programs
3.4 defects per million opportunities, as stated earlier in this chapter?
Based on Motorola's original work on Six Sigma in the 1980s, the convention used
for Six Sigma is a scoring system that accounts for more variation in a process than you
would typically find in a few weeks or months of data gathering. In other words, time
is an important factor in determining process variations. Table 8-3 shows a Six Sigma
Figure 8-10  Normal distribution and standard deviation
68.3%
95.5%
99.7%
mean
-3
-2
-1
+1
+2
+3
The normal curve
Specification Range
(in 6 Sigmas)
Percent of Population
within Range
Defective Units
per Billion
1
68.27
317,300,000
2
95.45
45,400,000
3
99.73
2,700,000
4
99.9937
63,000
5
99.999943
57
6
99.9999998
2
Table 8-2  Sigma and defective units
Chapter 8
348
conversion table applied to Six Sigma projects. The yield represents the number of units
handled correctly through the process steps. A defect is any instance in which the product
or service fails to meet customer requirements. Because most products or services have
multiple customer requirements, there can be several opportunities to have a defect. For
example, suppose that a company is trying to reduce the number of errors on customer
billing statements. There could be several errors on a billing statement due to a misspelled
name, incorrect address, wrong date of service, or calculation error. There might be 100
opportunities for a defect to occur on one billing statement. Instead of measuring the
number of defects per unit or billing statement, Six Sigma measures the number of defects
based on the number of opportunities.
As you can see, the Six Sigma conversion table shows that a process operating at six
sigma means there are no more than 3.4 defects per million opportunities. However, most
organizations today use the term six sigma project in a broad sense to describe projects
that will help them in achieving, sustaining, and maximizing business success through
better business processes.
A term you may hear in the telecommunications industry is six 9s of quality,
which is a measure of quality control equal to 1 fault in 1 million opportunities. In the
telecommunications industry, it means 99.9999 percent service availability or 30 seconds
of downtime a year. This level of quality has also been stated as the target goal for the
number of errors in a communications circuit, system failures, or errors in lines of code.
Achieving six 9s of quality requires continual testing to find and eliminate errors or
enough redundancy and backup equipment in systems to reduce the overall system failure
rate to the required level.
Testing
Many IT professionals think of testing as a stage that comes near the end of IT product
development. Instead of putting serious effort into proper planning, analysis, and design
of IT projects, some organizations rely on testing just before a product ships to ensure
some degree of quality. In fact, testing needs to be done during almost every phase of the
systems development life cycle, not just before the organization ships or hands over a
product to the customer.
Sigma
Yield
Defects per Million Opportunities (DPMO)
1
31.0%
690,000
2
69.2%
308,000
3
93.3%
66,800
4
99.4%
6,210
5
99.97%
230
6
99.99966%
3.4
Table 8-3  Six Sigma conversion table
Project Quality Management
349
Figure 8-11 shows one way of portraying the systems development life cycle. This
example includes 17 main tasks involved in a software development project and shows
their relationship to each other. Every project should start by initiating the project,
conducting a feasibility study, and then performing project planning. The figure then
shows that preparing detailed requirements and the detailed architecture for the system
can be performed simultaneously. The oval-shaped phases represent actual tests or tasks,
which will include test plans to help ensure quality on software development projects.12
Several of the phases in Figure 8-11 include specific work related to testing.

A unit test is done to test each individual component (often a program) to
ensure that it is as defect-free as possible. Unit tests are performed before
moving on to the integration test.
Figure 8-11  Testing tasks in the software development life cycle
1. Initiate Project
2. Feasibility
3. Project
Planning
4. Detailed
Requirements
7. Detailed
Architecture
8. Build Operating
Environment
5. Product
Selection
6. System
Design
10. Unit Design
Development
11. Code
12. Unit Test
13. Integration
Test
14. System Test
15. User
Acceptance Test
16.
Implementation
17. Post
Implementation
Iterative
Buy
Build
Testing Tasks
9. Physical
Database Design
Source: Hollstadt & Associates, Inc.
Chapter 8
350

Integration testing occurs between unit and system testing to test
functionally grouped components. It ensures that a subset or subsets of the
entire system work together.

System testing tests the entire system as one entity. It focuses on the big
picture to ensure that the entire system is working properly.

User acceptance testing is an independent test performed by end users prior
to accepting the delivered system. It focuses on the business fit of the system
to the organization, rather than technical issues.
Other types of testing include alpha and beta testing, performance testing, and
scalability testing. For example, several companies, including Amazon and Target, have
suffered serious consequences when their websites crashed because they could not
handle demand due to inadequate scalability testing. To help improve the quality of
software development projects, it is important for organizations to follow a thorough
and disciplined testing methodology. System developers and testers must also establish
a partnership with all project stakeholders to make sure the system meets their needs
and expectations and the tests are done properly. As described in the next section,
tremendous costs are involved in failure to perform proper testing.
Testing alone, however, cannot always solve software defect problems, according
to Watts S. Humphrey, a renowned expert on software quality and Fellow at Carnegie
Mellon's Software Engineering Institute. He believes that the traditional code/test/fix
cycle for software development is not enough. As code gets more complex, the number of
defects missed by testing increases and becomes the problem not just of testers, but also
of paying customers. Humphrey says that, on average, programmers introduce a defect for
every nine or ten lines of code, and the finished software, after all testing, contains about
five to six defects per thousand lines of code.
Although there are many different definitions, Humphrey defines a software defect
as anything that must be changed before delivery of the program. Testing does not
sufficiently prevent software defects because the number of ways to test a complex
system is huge. In addition, users will continue to invent new ways to use a system that
its developers never considered, so certain functionalities may never have been tested or
even included in the system requirements.
Humphrey suggests that people rethink the software development process to provide
no potential defects when you enter system testing. This means that developers must be
responsible for providing error-free code at each stage of testing. Humphrey teaches a
development process in which programmers measure and track the kinds of errors they
commit so they can use the data to improve their performance. He also acknowledges
that top management must support developers by letting them self-direct their work.
Programmers need to be motivated and excited to do high-quality work and have some
control over how they do it.13
For additional information on software testing, you can visit www.ISTQB.org, the
website for the International Software Testing Qualifications Board. The board offers a
testing certification scheme that is known around the world, with more than 535,000
certified testers in over 120 countries by 2018.
Project Quality Management
351
Modern Quality Management
Modern quality management requires customer satisfaction, prefers prevention to
inspection, and recognizes management responsibility for quality. Several noteworthy
people helped develop the following theories, tools, and techniques that define modern
quality management.14 The suggestions from these quality experts led to many projects to
improve quality and provided the foundation for today's Six Sigma projects. This section
summarizes major contributions made by Deming, Juran, Crosby, Ishikawa, Taguchi, and
Feigenbaum.
Deming and His 14 Points for Management
Dr. W. Edwards Deming is known primarily for his work on quality control in Japan.
Deming went to Japan after World War II at the request of the Japanese government to
assist in improving productivity and quality. Deming, a statistician and former professor
at New York University, taught Japanese manufacturers that higher quality meant greater
productivity and lower cost. American industry did not recognize Deming's theories
until Japanese manufacturers started creating products that seriously challenged
American products, particularly in the auto industry. Ford Motor Company then adopted
Deming's quality methods and experienced dramatic improvement in quality and sales
thereafter. By the 1980s, after seeing the excellent work coming out of Japan, several
U.S. corporations vied for Deming's expertise to help them establish quality improvement
programs in their own factories.
Many people are familiar with the Deming Prize, an award given to recognize high-
quality organizations, and Deming's Cycle for Improvement: plan, do, check, and act.
Most Six Sigma principles are based on the plan-do-check-act model created by Deming.
Many people are also familiar with Deming's 14 Points for Management, summarized
below from his text book Out of the Crisis15:
1. Create constancy of purpose for improvement of product and service.
2. Adopt the new philosophy.
3. Cease dependence on inspection to achieve quality.
4. End the practice of awarding business based on price tag alone. Instead,
minimize total cost by working with a single supplier.
5. Improve constantly and forever every process for planning, production, and
service.
6. Institute training on the job.
7. Adopt and institute leadership.
8. Drive out fear.
9. Break down barriers between staff areas.
10. Eliminate slogans, exhortations, and targets for the workforce.
11. Eliminate numerical quotas for the workforce and numerical goals for
management.
Chapter 8
352
12. Remove barriers that rob people of workmanship. Eliminate the annual rating
or merit system.
13. Institute a vigorous program of education and self-improvement for everyone.
14. Put everyone in the company to work to accomplish the transformation.
Juran and the Importance of Top Management Commitment to Quality
Joseph M. Juran, like Deming, taught Japanese manufacturers how to improve their
productivity. U.S. companies later discovered him as well. He wrote the first edition of
the Quality Control Handbook in 1974, stressing the importance of top management
commitment to continuous product quality improvement. In 2000, at the age of 94, Juran
published the fifth edition of this famous handbook.16 He also developed the Juran Trilogy:
quality improvement, quality planning, and quality control. Juran stressed the difference
between the manufacturer's view of quality and the customer's view. Manufacturers often
focus on conformance to requirements, but customers focus on fitness for use. Most
definitions of quality now use fitness for use to stress the importance of satisfying stated or
implied needs and not just meeting stated requirements or specifications. Juran developed
10 steps to quality improvement:
1. Build awareness of the need and opportunity for improvement.
2. Set goals for improvement.
3. Organize to reach the goals (establish a quality council, identify problems,
select projects, appoint teams, designate facilitators).
4. Provide training.
5. Carry out projects to solve problems.
6. Report progress.
7. Give recognition.
8. Communicate results.
9. Keep score.
10. Maintain momentum by making annual improvement part of the regular
systems and processes of the company.
Crosby and Striving for Zero Defects
Philip B. Crosby wrote Quality Is Free in 1979 and is best known for suggesting that
organizations strive for zero defects.17 He stressed that the costs of poor quality should
include all the costs of not doing the job right the first time, such as scrap, rework, lost
labor hours and machine hours, customer ill will and lost sales, and warranty costs.
Crosby suggested that the cost of poor quality is so understated that companies can
profitably spend unlimited amounts of money on improving quality. Crosby developed the
following 14 steps for quality improvement:
1. Make it clear that management is committed to quality.
2. Form quality improvement teams with representatives from
each department.
Project Quality Management
353
3. Determine where current and potential quality problems lie.
4. Evaluate the cost of quality and explain its use as a management tool.
5. Raise the quality awareness and personal concern of all employees.
6. Take actions to correct problems identified through previous steps.
7. Establish a committee for the zero-defects program.
8. Train supervisors to actively carry out their part of the quality improvement
program.
9. Hold a "zero-defects day" to let all employees realize that there has been a
change.
10. Encourage individuals to establish improvement goals for themselves and
their groups.
11. Encourage employees to communicate to management the obstacles they
face in attaining their improvement goals.
12. Recognize and appreciate those who participate.
13. Establish quality councils to communicate on a regular basis.
14. Do it all over again to emphasize that the quality improvement program
never ends.
Crosby developed the Quality Management Process Maturity Grid in 1978. This grid
can be applied to an organization's attitude toward product usability. For example, the
first stage in the grid is ignorance, where people might think they don't have any problems
with usability. The final stage is wisdom, where people have changed their attitudes so
that usability defect prevention is a routine part of their operation.
Ishikawa's Guide to Quality Control
Kaoru Ishikawa is best known for his 1972 book Guide to Quality Control.18 He developed
the concept of quality circles and pioneered the use of cause-and-effect diagrams, as
described earlier in this chapter. Quality circles are groups of nonsupervisors and work
leaders in a single company department who volunteer to conduct group studies on how to
improve the effectiveness of work in their department. Ishikawa suggested that Japanese
managers and workers were totally committed to quality, but that most U.S. companies
delegated the responsibility for quality to a few staff members.
Taguchi and Robust Design Methods
Genichi Taguchi is best known for developing the Taguchi methods for optimizing the
process of engineering experimentation. Key concepts in the Taguchi methods are that
quality should be designed into the product and not inspected into it, and that quality is
best achieved by minimizing deviation from the target value. For example, if the target
response time for accessing the EIS described in the opening case is half a second, there
should be little deviation from this time. By the late 1990s, Taguchi had become, in the
words of Fortune magazine, "America's new quality hero."19 Many companies, including
Xerox, Ford, Hewlett-Packard, and Goodyear, have recently used Taguchi's Robust Design
Chapter 8
354
methods to design high-quality products. Robust Design methods focus on eliminating
defects by substituting scientific inquiry for trial-and-error methods.
Feigenbaum and Workers' Responsibility for Quality
Armand V. Feigenbaum developed the concept of total quality control (TQC) in his
1983 book Total Quality Control: Engineering and Management.20 He proposed that
the responsibility for quality should rest with the people who do the work. In TQC,
product quality is more important than production rates, and workers are allowed to stop
production whenever a quality problem occurs.
Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award
The Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award originated in 1987 in the United States
to recognize companies that have achieved a level of world-class competition through
quality management. The award was started in honor of Malcolm Baldrige, who was the
U.S. Secretary of Commerce from 1981 until his death in a rodeo accident in July 1987.
Baldrige was a proponent of quality management as a key element in improving the
prosperity and long-term strength of U.S. organizations. The Malcolm Baldrige National
Quality Award is given by the president of the United States to U.S. businesses and
organizations. Organizations must apply for the award, and they must be judged
outstanding in seven areas: leadership, strategic planning, customer and market focus,
information and analysis, human resource focus, process management, and business
results. Three awards may be given annually in each of the categories of manufacturing,
service, small business, and education/healthcare. The awards recognize achievements
in quality and performance and raise awareness about the importance of quality as a
competitive edge; the award is not given for specific products or services.
ISO Standards
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) is a network of national
standards institutes that work in partnership with international organizations,
governments, industries, businesses, and consumer representatives. ISO 9000, a
quality system standard developed by the ISO, is a three-part, continuous cycle of
planning, controlling, and documenting quality in an organization. According to the
ISO website (www.iso.org) in January 2018, "The ISO 9000 family addresses various
aspects of quality management and contains some of ISO's best known standards.
The standards provide guidance and tools for companies and organizations who want
to ensure that their products and services consistently meet customer's requirements,
and that quality is consistently improved." The ISO quality management standards
and guidelines have earned a global reputation as the basis for establishing quality
management systems.
Standards continue to be updated, and new standards are developed as needed. For
example, in 2013, ISO collaborated with the International Electrotechnical Commission
(IEC) to publish a standard to help organizations integrate information security and
service management.21
Project Quality Management
355
ISO continues to offer standards to provide a framework for the assessment of
software processes. The overall goals of a standard are to encourage organizations that are
interested in improving quality of software products to employ proven, consistent, and
reliable methods for assessing the state of their software development processes. They can
also use their assessment results as part of coherent improvement programs. One of the
outcomes of assessment and consequent improvement programs is reliable, predictable,
and continuously improving software processes.
G l o b a l I s s u e s
In 2015, 15 electric cars were introduced throughout the world, including the Tesla
Model X, BMW X5 eDrive, VW Passat GTE Plug-in, Audi A3 e-Tron, Chevy Volt, and three
different Mercedes-Benz models. Fortunately, ISO provided standards to make them safe.
An even more impressive technology for automobiles-driverless cars-is sparking
new safety concerns. In a well-publicized event in March 2015, the Delphi car, a modi-
fied Audi SQ5 equipped with radar, high-end microprocessors, and software, completed a
trip across the United States. A person did have to sit in the driver's seat to comply with
state laws.
Unfortunately, an even more publicized event occurred in March 2018 when a
woman was killed by a self-driving car operated by an Uber driver as she crossed the
street while walking her bicycle. "It was exactly the type of accident Uber and other self-
driving car companies say their advanced sensors and computer programming should
prevent. 'This is not something I would expect artificial intelligence to struggle with,' said
Jim McPherson, a California attorney and self-driving car consultant who has criticized
the industry for moving too fast to put untested technology on public roads."22
The contributions of quality experts, quality awards, and quality standards are
important parts of project quality management. The Project Management Institute was
proud to announce in 1999 that its certification department had become the first in the
world to earn ISO 9000 certification, and that the PMBOK Guide had been recognized as
an international standard. Emphasizing quality in project management helps ensure that
projects create products or services that meet customer needs and expectations.
Improving It Project Quality
In addition to some of the suggestions provided for using good quality planning, quality
assurance, and quality control, other important issues are involved in improving the
quality of IT projects. Strong leadership, understanding the cost of quality, providing a
good workplace to enhance quality, and working toward improving the organization's
overall maturity level in software development and project management can all help
improve quality.
Chapter 8
356
Leadership
As Joseph M. Juran said in 1945, "It is most important that top management be quality-
minded. In the absence of sincere manifestation of interest at the top, little will happen
below."23 Juran and many other quality experts argue that the main cause of quality
problems is a lack of leadership.
As globalization continues to increase and customers become more and more
demanding, creating high-quality products quickly at a reasonable price is essential for
staying in business. Having good quality programs in place helps organizations remain
competitive. To establish and implement effective quality programs, top management
must lead the way. A large percentage of quality problems are associated with
management, not technical issues. Therefore, top management must take responsibility
for creating, supporting, and promoting quality programs.
Motorola provides an excellent example of a high-technology company that truly
emphasizes quality. Leadership is one of the factors that helped Motorola achieve its
great success in quality management and Six Sigma. Top management emphasized
the need to improve quality and helped all employees take responsibility for customer
satisfaction. Strategic objectives in Motorola's long-range plans included managing
quality improvement in the same way that new products or technologies were managed.
Top management stressed the need to develop and use quality standards and provided
resources such as staff, training, and customer inputs to help improve quality.
Leadership provides an environment conducive to producing quality. Management
must publicly declare the company's philosophy and commitment to quality, implement
company-wide training programs in quality concepts and principles, implement
measurement programs to establish and track quality levels, and actively demonstrate the
importance of quality. When every employee insists on producing high-quality products,
then top management has done a good job of promoting the importance of quality.
The Cost of Quality
The cost of quality is the cost of conformance plus the cost of nonconformance.
Conformance means delivering products that meet requirements and fitness for use.
Examples include the costs associated with developing a quality plan, costs for analyzing
and managing product requirements, and costs for testing. The cost of nonconformance
means taking responsibility for failures or not meeting quality expectations.
The five major cost categories related to quality include the following:
1. Prevention cost: The cost of planning and executing a project so that it is
error-free or within an acceptable error range. Preventive actions such as
training, detailed studies related to quality, and quality surveys of suppliers
and subcontractors fall under this category. Recall from the discussion of
cost management (see Chapter 7) that detecting defects in information
systems during the early phases of the systems development life cycle is
much less expensive than during the later phases. One hundred dollars spent
refining user requirements could save millions by finding a defect before
implementing a large system. The Year 2000 (Y2K) issue provided a good
example of these costs. If organizations had decided during the 1960s, 1970s,
Project Quality Management
357
and 1980s that all dates would need four computer characters to represent
the year instead of two, they would have saved billions of dollars.
2. Appraisal cost: The cost of evaluating processes and their outputs to ensure
that a project is error-free or within an acceptable error range. Activities
such as inspection and testing of products, maintenance of inspection and
test equipment, and processing and reporting inspection data all contribute
to appraisal costs of quality.
3. Internal failure cost: A cost incurred to correct an identified defect before
the customer receives the product. Items such as scrap and rework, charges
related to late payment of bills, inventory costs that are a direct result of
defects, costs of engineering changes related to correcting a design error,
premature failure of products, and correcting documentation all contribute to
internal failure cost.
4. External failure cost: A cost that relates to all errors not detected and
corrected before delivery to the customer. Items such as warranty cost, field
service personnel training cost, product liability suits, complaint handling,
and future business losses are examples of external failure costs.
5. Measurement and test equipment costs: The capital cost of equipment used
to perform prevention and appraisal activities.
Many industries tolerate a very low cost of nonconformance, but not the IT industry.
Tom DeMarco is famous for several studies he conducted on the cost of nonconformance
in the IT industry. In the early 1980s, DeMarco found that the average large company
devoted more than 60 percent of its software development efforts to maintenance. Around
50 percent of development costs were typically spent on testing and debugging software.24
Although these percentages may have improved some since the 1980s, they remain very
high especially in light of the need to address computer security issues.
Top management is primarily responsible for the high cost of nonconformance in
IT. Top managers often rush their organizations to develop new systems and do not give
project teams enough time or resources to do a project right the first time. To correct
these quality problems, top management must create a culture that embraces quality.
M e d i a S n a p s h o t
Computer viruses and malware software have been a quality concern for years. In a new
twist, consumers are now being warned that e-cigarettes, though better for health, can be
bad for computers.
According to the social media forum Reddit, an executive at a large corporation
found a malware infection on his computer. His IT staff investigated the problem,
and after looking at all traditional means of infection, they started looking at other
possibilities. The executive said he had recently quit smoking and started using an
e-cigarette made in China. IT found that the e-cigarette charger had malware hardcoded
on it that phoned home and infected the computer after it was plugged into the USB port.
(continued)
Chapter 8
358
The Impact of Organizational Influences, and Workplace
Factors on Quality
A study by Tom DeMarco and Timothy Lister produced interesting results related to
organizations and relative productivity. Starting in 1984, DeMarco and Lister conducted
"Coding War Games" over several years; more than 600 software developers from 92
organizations participated. The games were designed to examine programming quality
and productivity over a wide range of organizations, technical environments, and
programming languages. The study demonstrated that organizational issues had a much
greater influence on productivity than the technical environment or programming
languages.
For example, DeMarco and Lister found that productivity varied by a factor of about
one to ten across all participants. That is, one team may have finished a coding project
in one day while another team took ten days to finish the same project. In contrast,
productivity varied by an average of only 21 percent between pairs of software developers
from the same organization. If one team from an organization finished a coding project in
one day, the longest it took another team from the same organization to finish the project
was 1.21 days.
DeMarco and Lister also found no correlation between productivity and programming
language, years of experience, or salary. Furthermore, the study showed that providing
a dedicated workspace and a quiet work environment were key factors in improving
productivity. The results of the study suggested that top managers must focus on
workplace factors to improve productivity and quality.26
In their book Peopleware DeMarco and Lister argue that major problems with work
performance and project failures are not technological but sociological in nature.27 They
suggest minimizing office politics and giving smart people physical space, intellectual
responsibility, and strategic direction-and then just letting them work. The manager's
function is not to make people work but to make it possible for people to work by
removing political roadblocks. The Agile Manifesto described in Chapter 2 reiterates this
concept of focusing on individuals and interactions over processes and tools.
Technical security experts confirmed that anything, including e-cigarette chargers,
can infect your computer if it can be inserted into a USB port. Dmitri Alperovitch,
cofounder and chief technology officer of Crowd Strike, a cyber threat research firm,
said the malware can then steal your files, capture your keystrokes, or turn on your web
cam. He also said that if possible, use an electrical outlet instead of a USB port to charge
devices, because you can't infect an outlet.25
Although it is difficult to find reputable sources that confirm the story about the
problematic chargers, there are many other quality concerns with new consumer
products. For example, several news agencies ran stories showing smartphone users that
their whereabouts were being tracked if they did not turn off a certain feature. Owners
of smart TVs are advised to turn off the voice recognition feature so manufacturers
cannot eavesdrop on them. As you can see, IT can be used to create many innovative
products that people want, but as the saying goes, "Let the buyer beware!"
Project Quality Management
359
Expectations and Cultural Differences in Quality
Many experienced project managers know that a crucial aspect of project quality
management is managing expectations. Although many aspects of quality can be clearly
defined and measured, many cannot. Different project sponsors, customers, users, and
other stakeholders have different expectations about various aspects of projects. It's very
important to understand these expectations and manage conflicts that might occur due
to differences in expectations. For example, in the opening case, several users were upset
when they could not access information within a few seconds. In the past, it may have
been acceptable to wait two or three seconds for a system to load, but many of today's
computer users expect systems to run much faster. Project managers and their teams
must consider quality-related expectations as they define the project scope.
Expectations can also vary based on an organization's culture or geographic region.
Anyone who has traveled to different parts of an organization, a country, or the world
understands that expectations are not the same everywhere. For example, one department
in a company might expect workers to be in their work areas most of the workday and to
dress a certain way. Another department in the same company might focus on whether
workers produce expected results, no matter where they work or how they dress.
People who work in other countries for the first time are often amazed at different
quality expectations. Visitors to other countries may complain about things they once
took for granted, such as easily making cell phone calls, using a train or subway instead
of relying on a car for transportation, or getting up-to-date maps. It's important to realize
that different countries are at different stages of development in terms of quality.
A d v i c e f o r Y o u n g P r o f e s s i o n a l s
Managing expectations is a critical skill. It's important to understand other people's
expectations as well as your own. This is especially true when you start a new job. If
your immediate supervisor has not done so, ask him or her to describe what is expected
of you at work. Discuss any topics that come to mind (i.e., dress code, work speed and
quality, time at your desk, breaks, team interactions, customer interactions, advancing
your education, etc.). Also discuss your own expectations. Hopefully you did some of
this before accepting the job. If there's a big disconnect, it may be difficult for you to fit
in and perform well. Too many people, including experienced project managers, make
assumptions about expectations and get surprised when they do not match those of their
stakeholders. Never be afraid to ask what is expected of you.
Maturity Models
Another approach to improving quality in software development projects and project
management in general is the use of maturity models, which are frameworks for helping
organizations improve their processes and systems. Maturity models describe an
evolutionary path of increasingly organized and systematically more mature processes.
Chapter 8
360
Many maturity models have five levels, with the first level describing characteristics of
the least organized or mature organizations and the fifth level describing characteristics
of the most organized or mature organizations. Three popular maturity models include
the Software Quality Function Deployment (SQFD) model, the Capability Maturity Model
Integration (CMMI), and project management maturity models.
Software Quality Function Deployment Model
The Software Quality Function Deployment (SQFD) model is an adaptation of the
quality function deployment model suggested in 1986 as an implementation vehicle for
Total Quality Management (TQM). SQFD focuses on defining user requirements and
planning software projects. The result of SQFD is a set of measurable technical product
specifications and their priorities. Having clearer requirements can lead to fewer design
changes, increased productivity, and, ultimately, software products that are more likely to
satisfy stakeholder requirements. The idea of introducing quality early in the design stage
was based on Taguchi's emphasis on Robust Design methods.28
Capability Maturity Model Integration
Another popular maturity model is in continuous development at the Software
Engineering Institute (SEI) at Carnegie Mellon University. The SEI is a federally funded
research and development center established in 1984 by the U.S. Department of Defense
with a broad mandate to address the transition of software engineering technology. The
Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI) is "a process improvement approach that
provides organizations with the essential elements of effective processes. It can be used to
guide process improvement across a project, a division, or an entire organization. CMMI
helps integrate traditionally separate organizational functions, set process improvement
goals and priorities, provide guidance for quality processes, and provide a point of
reference for appraising current processes."
The capability levels of the CMMI are as follows:
0. Incomplete: At this level, a process is either not performed or partially
performed. No generic goals exist for this level, and one or more of the
specific goals of the process area are not satisfied.
1. Performed: A performed process satisfies the specific goals of the
process area and supports and enables the work needed to produce work
products. Although this capability level can result in improvements, those
improvements can be lost over time if they are not institutionalized.
2. Managed: At this level, a process has the basic infrastructure in place to
support it. The process is planned and executed based on policies and
employs skilled people who have adequate resources to produce controlled
outputs. The process discipline reflected by this level ensures that existing
practices are retained during times of stress.
3. Defined: At this maturity level, a process is rigorously defined. Standards,
process descriptions, and procedures for each project are tailored from the
organization's set of standard processes.
Project Quality Management
361
4. Quantitatively managed: At this level, a process is controlled using statistical
and other quantitative techniques. The organization establishes quantitative
objectives for quality and process performance that are used as criteria in
managing the process.29
5. Optimizing: An optimizing process is improved based on an understanding
of the common causes of variation inherent in the process. The focus is on
continually improving the range of process performance through incremental
and innovative improvements.30
Many companies that want to work in the government market have realized that
they will not get many opportunities even to bid on projects unless they have a CMMI
Level 3. According to one manager, "CMMI is really the future. People who aren't on the
bandwagon now are going to find themselves falling behind."31
Project Management Maturity Models
In the late 1990s, several organizations began developing project management maturity
models based on the CMMI. Just as organizations realized the need to improve their
software development processes and systems, they also realized the need to enhance their
project management processes and systems for all types of projects.
The PMI Standards Development Program published the first edition of the
Organizational Project Management Maturity Model (OPM3) in December 2003 and the
third edition was released in September 2013. More than 200 volunteers from around
the world were part of the initial OPM3 team. The model is based on market research
surveys that were sent to more than 30,000 project management professionals, and it
incorporates 180 best practices and more than 2,400 capabilities, outcomes, and key
performance indicators.32 According to John Schlichter, the OPM3 program director,
"The standard would help organizations to assess and improve their project management
capabilities as well as the capabilities necessary to achieve organizational strategies
through projects. The standard would be a project management maturity model, setting
the standard for excellence in project, program, and portfolio management best practices,
and explaining the capabilities necessary to achieve those best practices."33
B e s t P r a c t i c e
OPM3 provides the following example to illustrate a best practice, capability, outcome,
and key performance indicator:

Best practice: Establish internal project management communities

Capability: Facilitate project management activities

Outcome: Establish local initiatives, meaning the organization develops
pockets of consensus around areas of special interest

Key performance indicator: The community addresses local issues
(continued)
Chapter 8
362
Several other companies provide similar project management maturity models.
The International Institute for Learning, Inc., has five levels in its model called common
language, common processes, singular methodology, benchmarking, and continuous
improvement. ESI International Inc.'s model has five levels called ad hoc, consistent,
integrated, comprehensive, and optimizing. Regardless of the names of each level, the
goal is clear: Organizations want to improve their ability to manage projects. Many
organizations are assessing where they stand in terms of project management maturity,
just as they did for software development maturity with the SQFD and CMMI maturity
models. Organizations are recognizing that they must make a commitment to the
discipline of project management to improve project quality.
Using Software to Assist in Project Quality
Management
This chapter provides examples of several tools and techniques used in project quality
management. Software can be used to assist with several of these tools and techniques.
For example, you can use spreadsheet and charting software to create charts and diagrams
from many of the Seven Basic Tools of Quality. You can use statistical software packages
to help you determine standard deviations and perform many types of statistical analyses.
You can create Gantt charts using project management software to help you plan and
Best practices are organized into three levels: project, program, and portfolio.
Within each of those categories, best practices are categorized by four stages of process
improvement: standardize, measure, control, and improve. For example, the following
list contains several best practices listed in OPM3:

Project best practices:

Project Initiation Process Standardization

Project Plan Development Process Measurement

Project Scope Planning Process Control

Project Scope Definition Process Improvement

Program best practices:

Program Activity Definition Process Standardization

Program Activity Sequencing Process Measurement

Program Activity Duration Estimating Process Control

Program Schedule Development Process Improvement

Portfolio best practices:

Portfolio Resource Planning Process Standardization

Portfolio Cost Estimating Process Measurement

Portfolio Cost Budgeting Process Control

Portfolio Risk Management Planning Process Improvement34
Project Quality Management
363
track work related to project quality management. Specialized software products can
assist people with managing Six Sigma projects, creating quality control charts, and
assessing maturity levels. Project teams need to decide what types of software will help
them manage their particular projects.
Considerations For Agile/Adaptive Environments
The PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition provides the following information for project quality
management:
In order to navigate changes, agile methods call for frequent quality and review steps
built in throughout the project rather than toward the end of the project.
Recurring retrospectives regularly check on the effectiveness of the quality pro-
cesses. They look for the root cause of issues then suggest trials of new approaches to
improve quality. Subsequent retrospectives evaluate any trial processes to determine
if they are working and should be continued or new adjusting or should be dropped
from use.
In order to facilitate frequent, incremental delivery, agile methods focus on small
batches of work, incorporating as many elements of project deliverables as possible.
Small batch systems aim to uncover inconsistencies and quality issues earlier in the
project life cycle when the overall costs of change are lower.35
One of the reviewers of this text, Jeff Landry, provides additional information:
Project Quality Management for agile projects in particular is concerned with the
need-satisfying aspect of a project's unique purpose. Essential to project quality
management is satisfying key stakeholder needs or expectations. User acceptance
testing involves independent testing by users of working software at the end of each
iteration. Agile projects need an agreed upon definition of done that includes a quality
criterion. Escaped defects is a measure of agile software quality. The goal is zero
escaped defects, meaning that all defects are detected and corrected by testing during
development.36
Remember that agile methods can be used on all types of projects, not just software
development, and that several projects use a hybrid approach where some deliverables
are created using more traditional approaches. It is good to uncover quality issues in
small batches, but sometimes there are much bigger issues that must be addressed on
an organizational level. The same can be said for quality improvement. If one small team
discovers a way to improve quality, it is important to share that information throughout
the organization.
As you can see, quality is a very broad topic, and it is only one of the ten project
management knowledge areas. Project managers must focus on defining how quality
relates to their specific projects and ensure that those projects satisfy the needs for which
they were undertaken.
Chapter 8
364
C a s e W r a p - U p
Scott Daniels assembled a team to identify and resolve quality-related issues with the
EIS and to develop a plan to help the medical instruments company prevent future
quality problems. The team's first task was to research the problems with the EIS. The
team created a cause-and-effect diagram similar to the one in Figure 8-2. The team
also created a Pareto chart (see Figure 8-7) to help analyze the many complaints the
Help Desk received and documented about the EIS. After further investigation, Scott
and his team found that many managers using the system were very inexperienced in
using computers beyond basic office automation systems. They also found that most
users received no training on how to properly access or use the new EIS. The team
found no major problems with the EIS hardware or the users' individual computers. The
complaints about reports not giving consistent information all came from one manager,
who had actually misread the reports, so there were no problems with the software
design. Scott was very impressed with the quality of the entire project, except for the
training. Scott reported his team's findings to the project sponsor of the EIS, who was
relieved to find out that the quality problems were not as serious as many people feared.
Project Quality Management
365
Chapter Summary
Quality is a serious issue. Mistakes in several mission-critical IT systems have caused deaths,
and quality problems in many business systems have resulted in major financial losses.
Customers are ultimately responsible for defining quality. Important quality concepts include
satisfying stated or implied stakeholder needs, conforming to requirements, and delivering items
that are fit for use.
Project quality management includes planning quality management, performing quality
assurance, and controlling quality. Planning quality management identifies which quality
standards are relevant to the project and how to satisfy them. Managing quality involves
translating the quality management plan into executable quality activities. Controlling quality
includes monitoring specific project results to ensure that they comply with quality standards and
identifying ways to improve overall quality.
Many tools and techniques are related to project quality management. The Seven Basic
Tools of Quality include cause-and-effect diagrams, control charts, checksheets, scatter
diagrams, histograms, Pareto charts, and flowcharts. Statistical sampling helps define a realistic
number of items to include when analyzing a population. Six Sigma helps companies improve
quality by reducing defects. Standard deviation measures the variation in data. Testing is very
important in developing and delivering high-quality IT products.
Many people made significant contributions to the development of modern quality
management, including Deming, Juran, Crosby, Ishikawa, Taguchi, and Feigenbaum. Many
organizations today use their ideas, which also influenced Six Sigma principles. The Malcolm
Baldrige National Quality Award and ISO 9000 have also helped organizations emphasize the
importance of improving quality.
There is much room for improvement in IT project quality. Strong leadership helps emphasize
the importance of quality. Understanding the cost of quality provides an incentive for its
improvement. Providing a good workplace can improve quality and productivity. Understanding
stakeholders' expectations and cultural differences are also related to project quality
management. Developing and following maturity models can help organizations systematically
improve their project management processes to increase the quality and success rate of projects.
Several types of software are available to assist in project quality management. It is
important for project teams to decide which software will be most helpful for their particular
projects.
Be sure to consider how project quality management can differ in agile/adaptive
environments.
Discussion Questions
1. Discuss some of the examples of poor quality in IT projects presented in the "What Went
Wrong?" section. Could most of these problems have been avoided? Why do you think there
are so many examples of poor quality in IT projects?
2. What are the main processes in project quality management?
3. Why is quality management becoming more important? What does it mean to use lean in
quality assurance?
Chapter 8
366
4. How do functionality, system outputs, performance, reliability, and maintainability
requirements affect quality planning?
5. What are benchmarks, and how can they assist in performing quality assurance? Describe
typical benchmarks associated with a college or university.
6. What are the three main categories of outputs for quality control?
7. Provide examples of when you would use at least three of the Seven Basic Tools of Quality
on an IT project.
8. Discuss the history of modern quality management. How have experts such as Deming, Juran,
Crosby, and Taguchi affected the quality movement and today's use of lean and Six Sigma?
9. Discuss three suggestions for improving IT project quality that were not made in this chapter.
10. Describe three types of software that can assist in project quality management.
11. What are some of the considerations for project quality management in agile/adaptive
environments?
Quick Quiz
1.
is the degree to which a set of inherent characteristics fulfills requirements.
a.
Quality
b.
Conformance to requirements
c.
Fitness for use
d.
Reliability
2. What is the purpose of project quality management?
a.
To produce the highest-quality products and services possible
b.
To ensure that appropriate quality standards are met
c.
To ensure that the project will satisfy the needs for which it was undertaken
d.
All of the above
3.
generates ideas for quality improvements by comparing specific project
practices or product characteristics to those of other projects or products within or outside
the performing organization.
a.
Quality audits
b.
Design of experiments
c.
Six Sigma
d.
Benchmarking
4. What does the term kaizen mean?
a.
Minimize waste
b.
Maximize value
c.
Do it right the first time
d.
Improvement
Project Quality Management
367
5. What tool can you use to determine whether a process is in control or out of control?
a.
A cause-and-effect diagram
b.
A control chart
c.
A run chart
d.
A control panel diagram
6. Six Sigma's target for perfection is the achievement of no more than

defects, errors, or mistakes per million opportunities.
a.
6
b.
9
c.
3.4
d.
1
7. The seven run rule states that if seven data points in a row on a control chart are all below
the mean, above the mean, or all increasing or decreasing, then the process needs to be
examined for
problems.
a.
random
b.
nonrandom
c.
Six Sigma
d.
quality
8. What is the preferred order for performing testing on IT projects?
a.
Unit testing, integration testing, system testing, user acceptance testing
b.
Unit testing, system testing, integration testing, user acceptance testing
c.
Unit testing, system testing, user acceptance testing, integration testing
d.
Unit testing, integration testing, user acceptance testing, system testing
9.
is known for his work on quality control in Japan, and he developed the
14 Points for Management in his text Out of the Crisis.
a.
Juran
b.
Deming
c.
Crosby
d.
Ishikawa
10. PMI's OPM3 is an example of a
model or framework for helping
organizations improve their processes and systems.
a.
benchmarking
b.
Six Sigma
c.
maturity
d.
quality
Chapter 8
368
Quick Quiz Answers
1. a; 2. c; 3. d; 4. d; 5. b; 6. c; 7. b; 8. a; 9. b; 10. c
Exercises
1. Assume that your organization wants to hire new instructors for your project management
course. Develop a list of quality standards that you could use in making this hiring decision.
Suppose that some current instructors do not meet these standards. Provide suggestions for
how you would handle this situation.
2. Create a Pareto chart based on the information in the following table. First, create a
spreadsheet in Excel using the data in the table. List the most frequent customer problems
first. Use the Excel template called pareto_chart.xls on the text's Companion website and
check your entries so your resulting chart looks similar to the one in Figure 8-7. If you need
assistance creating the chart, search for videos describing how to create Pareto charts
using Excel.
Customer Complaints
Frequency/Week
Customer is on hold too long
90
Customer gets transferred to wrong area or cut off
20
Service rep cannot answer customer's questions
120
Service rep does not follow through as promised
40
3. To illustrate a normal distribution, roll a pair of dice 30 times and graph the results. You are
more likely to roll a 6, 7, or 8 than a 2 or 12. To create the graph, use Excel or draw one by
hand. Label the x-axis with the numbers 2 through 12. Label the y-axis with the numbers 1
through 10. Fill in the appropriate grid for each roll of the dice. Do your results resemble a
normal distribution? Why or why not?
4. Research the criteria for the Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award or a similar quality
award provided by another organization. Investigate a company that has received this award.
What steps did the company take to earn it? What are the benefits of earning a quality
award? Summarize your findings in a short paper to management.
5. Review the information in this chapter about Six Sigma principles and Six Sigma
organizations. Brainstorm ideas for a potential Six Sigma project that could improve quality
on your campus, at your workplace, or in your community. Write a short paper describing
one project idea and explain why it would be a Six Sigma project. Review and discuss how
you could use the DMAIC process on this project.
6. Research information on performing quality assurance using lean. How can lean be used on
IT projects? How can you use kanban cards, a lean tool, to maximize customer value while
minimizing waste?
Project Quality Management
369
7. Review the concepts in this chapter that are related to improving the quality of software.
Write a short paper describing how you could apply these concepts to software development
projects.
Running Case
Part 5: Project Quality Management
The Global Treps Project team is working hard to ensure they meet expectations, especially
for the people who will be holding and participating in the four events. The team has a detailed
scope statement, but you want to make sure you are not forgetting requirements that might affect
how people view the quality of the project. You know that the project's sponsor and other key
stakeholders are most concerned with getting people to use the new website, having successful
events, and helping promote entrepreneurship across the globe. You also know that various
geographic and cultural issues will need to be addressed.
Tasks
1. Develop a list of quality standards or requirements related to meeting the stakeholder
expectations described in the running case. Provide a brief description of each requirement.
For example, two requirements related to the new website might be that users can read
the content in several different languages and that users provide good ratings for the online
video training.
2. Based on the list you created for Task 1, determine how you will measure progress on
meeting the requirements. For example, you might have people take a survey after they view
the online training videos to collect feedback.
3. After analyzing survey information, you decide to create a Pareto chart to see which types
of guidelines for running an event generated the most interest. First, create a spreadsheet in
Excel using the data in the following table. List the most frequently requested guidelines first.
Use the Excel template called pareto_chart.xls on the text's Companion website and check
your entries so the resulting chart looks similar to the one in Figure 8-7.
Requested Guidelines
# of Times Requested
How to find good participants
24
How participants should present their ideas
20
How to find local sharks
15
How to select participants
12
How to manage and engage the audience
7
How to set up the facilities
3
Chapter 8
370
Key Terms
5 whys
acceptance decisions
appraisal cost
benchmarking
Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI)
cause-and-effect diagram
checksheet
conformance
conformance to requirements
control chart
cost of nonconformance
cost of quality
defect
design of experiments
DMAIC (Define, Measure, Analyze, Improve,
Control)
external failure cost
features
fishbone diagram
fitness for use
flowchart
functionality
histogram
integration testing
internal failure cost
Ishikawa diagram
ISO 9000
kaizen
lean
maintainability
Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award
maturity model
mean
measurement and test equipment costs
metric
normal distribution
Pareto analysis
Pareto chart
performance
prevention cost
process adjustments
project quality management
quality
quality assurance
quality audit
quality circles
quality control
reliability
rework
Robust Design methods
run chart
scatter diagram
seven run rule
six 9s of quality
Six Sigma
software defect
Software Quality Function Deployment
(SQFD) model
standard deviation
statistical sampling
system outputs
system testing
unit test
user acceptance testing
yield
Project Quality Management
371
Endnotes

1 This joke was found on hundreds of websites and printed in the Consultants in Minnesota
Newsletter, Independent Computer Consultants Association (December 1998).

2 Design News (February 1988).

3 Datamation (May 1987).

4 Jackie Wattles, Ben Geier, and Matt Egan, "Wells Fargo's 17-month nightmare," CNN Money
(February 5, 2018).

5 Peter Martinez, "Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg breaks silence, admits 'breach of trust,'"
CBS News (March 21, 2018).

6 David J. Anderson, Kanban (Seattle WA: Blue Hole Press Inc, 2013).

7 Peter S. Pande, Robert P. Neuman, and Roland R.Cavanagh, The Six Sigma Way
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 2000), p. xi.

8 James C. Collins and Jerry I. Porras, Built to Last: Successful Habits of Visionary
Companies (New York: Harper Business, 1994).

9 "What You Need to Know About Six Sigma," Productivity Digest (December 2001), p. 38.

10 Peter S. Pande, Robert P. Neuman, and Roland R. Cavanagh, The Six Sigma Way
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 2000), p. 137.

11 Lee Clifford, "Why You Can Safely Ignore Six Sigma," Fortune (January 22, 2001), p. 140.

12 Hollstadt & Associates, Inc., Software Development Project Life Cycle Testing Methodology
User's Manual (Burnsville: MN, August 1998), p. 13.

13 Bart Eisenberg, "Achieving Zero-Defects Software," Pacific Connection (January 2004).

14 Harold Kerzner, Project Management, sixth edition (New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold,
1998), p. 1048.

15 W. Edwards Deming, Out of the Crisis (Boston: MIT Press, 1986).

16 Joseph M. Juran and A. Blanton Godfrey, Juran's Quality Handbook, fifth edition (New York:
McGraw-Hill Professional, 2000).

17 Philip B. Crosby, Quality Is Free: The Art of Making Quality Certain (New York: McGraw-Hill,
1979).

18 Kaoru Ishikawa, Guide to Quality Control, second edition (Asian Productivity Organization,
1986).

19 Gene Bylinsky, "How to Bring Out Better Products Faster," Fortune (November 23, 1998),
p. 238[B].

20 Armand V. Feigenbaum, Total Quality Control: Engineering and Management, third rev.
edition (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1991).

21 Elizabeth Gasiorowski Denis, "Integrating Information Security and Service
management-A New ISO/IEC Standard Tells How," https://www.iso.org/news/2013/01/
Ref1696.html (January 16, 2013).
Chapter 8
372

22 Russ Mitchell, "Experts say video of Uber's self-driving car killing a pedestrian suggests its
technology may have failed," LA Times (March 22, 2018).

23 American Society for Quality (ASQ), "About ASQ: Joseph M. Juran," asq.com (www.asq
.org/about-asq/who-we-are/bio_juran.html).

24 Tom DeMarco, Quality Controlling Software Projects: Management, Measurement and
Estimation (New Jersey: Prentice Hall PTR Facsimile Edition, 1986).

25 Ellen Nakashima, " Are E-Cigs Bad for Your Computer?" The Washington Post (November
24, 2014).

26 Tom DeMarco and Timothy Lister, Peopleware: Productive Projects and Teams (New York:
Dorset House, 1987).

27 Tom DeMarco and Timothy Lister, Peopleware: Productive Projects and Teams, second
edition (New York: Dorset House, 1999).

28 R. R.Yilmaz and Sangit Chatterjee, "Deming and the Quality of Software Development,"
Business Horizons [Foundation for the School of Business at Indiana University] 40, no. 6
(November-December 1997), pp. 51-58.

29 Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon, "What is CMMI," www.sei.cmu.edu/cmmi/
general/index.html (January 2007).

30 CMMI Product Team, "CMMI for Development, Version 1.2," CMU/SEI-2006-TR-008
ESC-TR-2006-008 (August 2006).

31 Michael Hardy, "Strength in Numbers: New Maturity Ratings Scheme Wins Support Among
Systems Integrators," fcw.com (March 28, 2004).

32 John Schlichter, "The Project Management Institute's Organizational Project Management
Maturity Model: An Update on the PMI's OPM3 Program," pmworldlibrary.net (September
2002).

33 John Schlichter, "The History of OPM3," Project Management World Today (June 2003).

34 Project Management Institute, Organizational Project Management Maturity Model
(OPM3), Third Edition (2013).

35 Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of
Knowledge (PMBOK Guide) - Sixth Edition (2017), p. 276.
36 Jeffrey. P. Landry and Rachel McDaniel, " Agile Preparation Within a Traditional Project
Management Course," Information Systems Education Journal, Volume 14, No. 6
(November 2016).
C h a p t e r 9
Project Resource
Management
L e a r n i n g O b j e c t i v e s
After reading this chapter, you will be able to:

Explain the importance of good resource management on projects, including
the current state of the global IT workforce and future implications for IT

Define project resource management and understand its processes

Summarize key concepts for managing people by understanding theories
of motivation, influence, and power; how people and teams can become
more effective; emotional intelligence; and leadership

Discuss resource management planning and be able to create a human
resource plan, project organizational chart, responsibility assignment
matrix, and resource histogram

Describe the process of estimating activity resources

Discuss issues that are typically involved in resource acquisition,
particularly as they involve resource assignments, resource loading, and
resource leveling

Assist in team development with training, team-building activities, and
reward systems

Explain and apply several tools and techniques to help manage a project
team and summarize general advice on managing teams

Summarize the process of controlling resources

Describe how project management software can assist in project
resource management

Discuss considerations for agile/adaptive environments
Chapter 9
374
The Importance of Resource Management
Many corporate executives have said, "People are our most important asset."
People determine the success and failure of organizations and projects. Most project
managers agree that managing human resources effectively is one of the toughest challenges
they face. Managing people is a vital component of project resource management, especially
in the IT field-in which qualified people are often hard to find and keep. It is important to
understand global IT workforce issues and their implications for the future.
The Global IT Workforce
Although the IT labor market has had its ups and downs, there will always be a need
for people to develop and maintain IT hardware, software, networks, and applications.
The global job market for IT workers is expanding, and the demand for project managers
continues to increase:

Demand for new IT products and services continues to increase. By June 2017,
80 percent of the youth population in 104 countries were online, and there
were over 4.3 billion mobile-broadband subscriptions.1
O p e n i n g C a s e
This was the third time someone from the Information Technology (IT) department
tried to work with Ben, the head of the F-44 radar upgrade project. The F-44 was one of
five aircraft programs in the company. The company had program managers in charge
of each aircraft program, with several project managers reporting to them. Workers
supporting each project were part of a matrix organization, with people from engineering,
IT, manufacturing, sales, and other departments allocated as needed to each project.
Ben had been with the company for almost 30 years, and was known for being "rough
around the edges" and very demanding. The company was losing money on the F-44 radar
upgrade project because the upgrade kits were not being delivered on time. The Canadian
government had written severe late-penalty fees into its contract, and other customers
were threatening to take their business elsewhere. Ben blamed it all on the IT department
for not letting his staff access the upgrade project's information system directly so they
could work with their customers and suppliers more effectively. The information system
was based on very old technology that only a couple of people in the company knew how
to use. It often took days or even weeks for Ben's group to get the information they needed.
Ed Davidson, a senior programmer, attended a meeting with Sarah Ellis, an internal
IT business consultant. Sarah was in her early thirties and had advanced quickly in her
company, primarily due to her keen ability to work well with all types of people. Sarah's
job was to uncover the real problems with IT support for the F-44 radar upgrade project,
and then develop a solution with Ben and his team. If she found it necessary to invest in
more IT hardware, software, or staff, Sarah would write a business case to justify these
investments and then work with Ed, Ben, and his group to implement the suggested
solution as quickly as possible.
Ben and three of his project team members entered the conference room. Ben threw
his books on the table and started yelling at Ed and Sarah. Ed could not believe his eyes
or ears when Sarah stood nose to nose with Ben and started yelling right back at him.
Project Resource Management
375

By 2020, global information and communications technology (ICT) spending
is projected to grow to $5.5 trillion. "New technologies, which IDC calls
'Innovation Accelerators,' will provide almost $7.4 trillion in aggregate
industry revenue from 2015-2020, adding $1.8 trillion to the overall size of
the industry in terms of annual sales by the end of the forecast period."2

The number of jobs available to IT professionals is expected to increase by
12 percent by 2024. "While job seekers will offer an array of technical skills,
employers are typically looking for a more balanced employee who also
possesses soft skills that are not readily apparent on a resume."3

IT job candidates are in the driver's seat. Jason Hayman, market research
manager for IT staffing firm TEK systems, cites a report estimating that
"500,000 to 1 million IT jobs go unfilled every year, but notes that some
analysts say the figure is closer to 2 million. He says there's a classic supply-
and-demand scenario working here, with demand for talent far exceeding
supply. 'The takeaway is there aren't enough of these workers.'"4

As mentioned in Chapter 1, project management continues to be one of the
ten hottest tech skills, listed as number three according to ComputerWorld.5

"By 2027, employers will need nearly 88 million individuals in project
management-oriented roles. China and India will represent more than
75 percent of the total project management-oriented employment. . . . Talent
shortages in the profession can potentially create risks of nearly US$208
billion in GDP over the 10-year period in the 11 countries examined."6
These studies highlight the need for skilled IT workers and project managers. As the
economy changes and technology progresses, however, people need to continually upgrade
their skills to remain marketable and flexible. Negotiation and presentation skills are also
crucial to finding and keeping a good job. Workers need to know how they personally
contribute to an organization's bottom line and how they can continue to do so.
Implications for the Future of IT Human Resource Management
It is crucial for organizations to practice what they preach about human resources. If
people truly are their greatest asset, organizations must work to fulfill their human resource
needs and the needs of individual people in their organizations, regardless of the job market.
If organizations want to implement IT projects successfully, they need to understand the
importance of project resource management and make effective use of people.
Proactive organizations address current and future human resource needs by
improving benefits, redefining work hours and incentives, and finding future workers.
Many organizations have changed their benefits policies to meet worker needs. Most
workers assume that companies provide some perks, such as casual dress codes,
flexible work hours, on-the-job training, continuing education, and tuition assistance.
Other companies might provide on-site day care, fitness club discounts, or matching
contributions to retirement savings. Google, the winner of Fortune's 100 Best Companies
award multiple times in recent years, provides employees with free gourmet meals, on-site
doctors, a swimming spa and corporate gym, beach volleyball, Foosball, video games, pool
tables, ping-pong, roller hockey, and weekly Thank Goodness It's Friday (TGIF) parties!
Google built a large, outdoor sports complex in 2011 to help keep its employees in shape.
Chapter 9
376
The company also provides indoor recreation with bowling alleys and a dance studio,
and offers a generous amount of leave for new parents (regardless of gender, including
dads, domestic partners, adoptive parents, and surrogate parents)-12 weeks of fully paid
"baby bonding" plus $500.7 With an average of 130 applicants per hire, it's almost ten
times harder to get a job at Google than it is to get into Harvard.
Other trends affecting the future of human resource management relate to the hours
that organizations expect many IT professionals to work and how they reward performance.
Today people are happier when they can work less than 40 hours a week or work from
home. If companies plan their projects well, they can avoid the need for overtime, or they
can make it clear that overtime is optional. Many companies also outsource more of their
project work to manage the fluctuating demand for workers, as described in Chapter 12,
Project Procurement Management.
Companies can also provide incentives that use performance, not hours worked, as
the basis of rewards. If performance can be measured objectively, as it can in many aspects
of IT jobs, then it should not matter where employees do their work or how long it takes.
For example, if a technical writer can produce a high-quality publication at home in one
week, the company should accept the arrangement instead of insisting that the writer come
to the office and take two weeks to produce the publication. Objective measures of work
performance and incentives based on meeting those criteria are important considerations.
G l o b a l I s s u e s
In early 2013, Marissa Meyer, Yahoo's CEO, issued a memo stating that Yahoo employees
could no longer work from home. She believed that people needed to work side-by-side to
have the best communication and collaboration. This new policy caused quite a stir through-
out the world as workers and managers discussed the pros and cons of working from home.
Another CEO, Andy Mattes at Diebold, which makes ATMs, took the exact opposite
approach as Meyer and started recruiting employees who wanted to work from home.
He told The Huffington Post that he wanted to lure the best and brightest workers away
from Yahoo, HP, Oracle, and other companies cutting back on telecommuting.
Which CEO has the right approach? The Huffington Post would vote for Andy
Mattes. "Now, two years later, it's clear: Telecommuting has won. Even Yahoo seems to
have softened its stance. Workers inside the company told HuffPost that some employees
still do occasionally work from home, depending on their job, and some do not have a
desk in the office. Yahoo declined to comment for this article."8
The need to develop future talent in IT has important implications for everyone. Who
will maintain the systems we have today when the last of the "baby boomer" generation
retires? Who will continue to develop new technologies and innovative products based
on them? Some schools require all students to take computer literacy courses, although
most teenagers today already know how to use computers, iPods, iPads, cell phones, and
other technologies. But are today's children learning the skills they'll need to develop
new technologies and work on global teams? As the workforce becomes more diverse,
Project Resource Management
377
will more women and minorities be ready and willing to enter IT fields? Several colleges,
government agencies, and private groups have programs to help recruit more women and
minorities into technical fields. Some companies provide options to assist employees who
desire work-life integration. Today's efforts to come up with innovative ways to address
these issues will help to develop the human resources needed for future IT projects.
W h a t W e n t W r o n g ?
A report by CompTIA found a gap between skills that employers wanted and what they
actually found in the IT workforce.

Even with 5.73 million people working in the U.S. IT industry, 68 percent of IT
firms report having a "very challenging" time finding new staff.

Fifty-two percent of organizations report having job openings, and 33 percent
say they are understaffed, while 42 percent say they are fully staffed but want
to hire more people in order to expand.

Fifty-eight percent of businesses are concerned about the quality and quantity
of IT talent available for hire.

Top technology priorities in this survey included security, data storage, and
network infrastructure.

The number one strategy to handle understaffing is requiring workers to put in
more hours.

Ninety-four percent of IT professionals plan to pursue more training.9
What Is Project Resource Management?
Project resource management includes the processes required to make the most effective
use of the human and physical resources (facilities, equipment, materials, supplies, etc.)
involved with a project. Human resource management includes all project stakeholders:
sponsors, customers, project team members, support staff, suppliers supporting the
project, and so on. Physical resources include facilities, equipment, materials, and
supplies. Project resource management includes the following four processes:
1. Planning resource management involves deciding how to estimate, acquire,
manage, and use project resources. The main outputs are a resource
management plan, team charter, and project documents updates.
2. Estimating activity resources involves estimating human and physical
resources needed to complete project work. Outputs include resource
requirements, basis of estimates, a resource breakdown structure, and
project documents updates.
3. Acquiring resources includes obtaining team members, facilities, equipment,
materials, supplies, and other resources as needed. Outputs include physical
and project team assignments, resource calendars, change requests, and
updates to several documents.
Chapter 9
378
4.
Developing the project team involves building individual and group skills to
enhance project performance. Team-building skills are often a challenge for
many project managers. The main outputs of this process are team performance
assessments, change requests, and updates to several documents.
5.
Managing the project team involves tracking team member performance,
motivating team members, providing timely feedback, resolving issues and
conflicts, and coordinating changes to help enhance project performance.
Outputs of this process include change requests, project management plan
updates, project documents updates, and organizational process assets updates.
6. Controlling resources ensures that a project's physical resources are available
as planned, monitoring the planned versus actual resource utilization, and
taking corrective action when needed. Outputs include work performance
information, change requests, and updates to the project management plan
and project documents.
Figure 9-1 summarizes the inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of project
resource management.
You were introduced to several topics related to human resource management,
including understanding organizations, stakeholders, and different organizational
structures, in Chapter 2, The Project Management and Information Technology Context.
You will learn about other related issues in Chapter 13, Project Stakeholder Management.
This chapter expands on some of those topics and introduces other important concepts
in project resource management, including theories about managing and leading people,
resource loading, and resource leveling. You also learn how to use software to assist in
project resource management.
Keys To Managing and Leading People
Industrial-organizational psychologists and management theorists have devoted extensive
research and thought to the field of managing and leading people at work. Psychosocial
issues that affect how people work and how well they work include motivation, influence
and power, effectiveness, emotional intelligence, and leadership. This section reviews
the contributions of Abraham Maslow, Frederick Herzberg, David McClelland, and
Douglas McGregor to an understanding of motivation; the work of H. J. Thamhain and
D. L. Wilemon on influencing workers and reducing conflict; the effect of power on project
teams; Stephen Covey's work on how people and teams can become more effective;
Howard Gardner and Daniel Goleman's focus on emotional intelligence; and recent
research on leadership. The final part of this section looks at some implications and
recommendations for project managers.
Motivation Theories
Psychologists, managers, coworkers, teachers, parents, and most people in general
struggle to understand what motivates people to do what they do. Intrinsic motivation
causes people to participate in an activity for their own enjoyment. For example,
Project Resource Management
379
Source: PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition. Project Management Institute, Inc. (2017). Copyright and
all rights reserved. Material from this publication has been reproduced with permission of PMI.
Figure 9-1  Project resource management overview
9.1 Plan Resource
Management
9.4 Develop Team
9.5 Manage Team
9.6 Control Resources
.1 Inputs
.1 Project charter
.2 Project management plan
.3 Project documents
.4 Enterprise environmental
factors
.5 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Data representation
.3 Organizational theory
.4 Meetings
.3 Outputs
.1 Resource management plan
.2 Team charter
.3 Project documents updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Enterprise environmental
factors
.4 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Bottom-up estimating
.3 Analogous estimating
.4 Parametric estimating
.5 Data analysis
.6 Project management
information system
.7 Meetings
.3 Outputs
.1 Resource requirements
.2 Basis of estimates
.3 Resource breakdown
structure
.4 Project documents updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Enterprise environmental
factors
.4 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Decision making
.2 Interpersonal and team
skills
.3 Pre-assignment
.4 Virtual teams
.3 Outputs
.1 Physical resource
assignments
.2 Project team assignments
.3 Resource calendars
.4 Change requests
.5 Project management plan
updates
.6 Project documents updates
.7 Enterprise environmental
factors updates
.8 Organizational process
assets updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Enterprise environmental
factors
.4 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Colocation
.2 Virtual teams
.3 Communication technology
.4 Interpersonal and team
skills
.5 Recognition and rewards
.6 Training
.7 Individual and team
assessments
.8 Meetings
.3 Outputs
.1 Team performance
assessments
.2 Change requests
.3 Project management plan
updates
.4 Project documents updates
.5 Enterprise environmental
factors updates
.6 Organizational process
assets updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Work performance reports
.4 Team performance
assessments
.5 Enterprise environmental
factors
.6 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Interpersonal and team
skills
.2 Project management
information system
.3 Outputs
.1 Change requests
.2 Project management plan
updates
.3 Project documents updates
.4 Enterprise environmental
factors updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Work performance data
.4 Agreements
.5 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Data analysis
.2 Problem solving
.3 Interpersonal and team
skills
.4 Project management
information system
.3 Outputs
.1 Work performance
information
.2 Change requests
.3 Project management plan
updates
.4 Project documents updates
9.2 Estimate
Activity Resources
9.3 Acquire Resources
Project Resource
Management Overview
Chapter 9
380
some people love to read, write, or play an instrument because it makes them feel
good. Extrinsic motivation causes people to do something for a reward or to avoid a
penalty. For example, some young children would prefer not to play an instrument,
but they do because they receive a reward or avoid a punishment for doing so. Why do
some people require no external motivation to produce high-quality work while others
require significant external motivation to perform routine tasks? Why can't you get
someone who is extremely productive at work to do simple tasks at home? Humankind
is fascinated with asking and trying to answer these types of questions. A basic
understanding of motivational theory will help anyone who works or lives with other
people to understand themselves and others. Keep in mind that the following are brief
summaries, and you are encouraged to research these topics further, especially as they
relate to working with people on projects.
Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs
Abraham Maslow, a highly respected psychologist who rejected the dehumanizing
negativism of psychology in the 1950s, is best known for developing a hierarchy of needs.
In the 1950s, proponents of Sigmund Freud's psychoanalytic theory promoted the idea
that human beings were not the masters of their destiny and that all their actions were
governed by unconscious processes dominated by primitive sexual urges. During the same
period, behavioral psychologists saw human beings as controlled by the environment.
Maslow argued that both schools of thought failed to recognize unique qualities of human
behavior: love, self-esteem, belonging, self-expression, and creativity. He argued that these
unique qualities enable people to make independent choices, which gives them full control
of their destiny.
Figure 9-2 shows the basic pyramid structure of Maslow's hierarchy of needs, which
states that people's behaviors are guided or motivated by a sequence of needs. At the
bottom of the hierarchy are physiological needs. Once physiological needs are satisfied,
safety needs guide behavior. Once safety needs are satisfied, social needs come to the
Figure 9-2  Maslow's hierarchy of needs
A satisﬁed need is no longer a motivator
high
5. Self-
Actualization
4. Esteem
3. Social
2. Safety
1. Physiological
low
Challenging projects,
opportunities for
innovation and creativity
Recognition,
prestige, status
Acceptance, love,
affection, association
with a team/group
Physical safety,
economic
security
Food,
water,
etc.
Project Resource Management
381
forefront, and so on up the hierarchy. The order of these needs and their relative sizes
in the pyramid are significant. Maslow suggests that each level of the hierarchy is a
prerequisite for the levels above. A person cannot consider self-actualization without first
addressing basic needs of security and safety. For example, people in an emergency, such
as a flood or hurricane, do not worry about personal growth. Personal survival will be their
main motivation. Once a particular need is satisfied, however, it no longer serves as a
potent motivator of behavior.
The bottom four needs in Maslow's hierarchy-physiological, safety, social, and
esteem-are referred to as deficiency needs, and the highest level, self-actualization,
is considered a growth need. Only after meeting deficiency needs can people act upon
growth needs. Self-actualized people are problem-focused, have an appreciation for life,
are concerned about personal growth, and are able to have peak experiences.
Most people working on an IT project probably have their basic physiological and
safety needs met. If someone has a sudden medical emergency or is laid off from work,
however, physiological and safety needs will move to the forefront. The project manager
needs to understand each team member's motivation, especially with regard to social,
esteem, and self-actualization or growth needs. Team members who are new to a company
and city might be motivated by social needs. To address social needs, some companies
organize gatherings and social events for new workers. Other project members may find
these events to be an invasion of personal time that they would rather spend with their
friends and family, or working on an advanced degree.
Maslow's hierarchy conveys a message of hope and growth. People can work to
control their own destinies and naturally strive to satisfy higher needs. Successful project
managers know they must focus on meeting project goals, but they also must understand
team members' personal goals and needs to provide appropriate motivation and maximize
team performance.
Herzberg's Motivation-Hygiene Theory
Frederick Herzberg is best known for distinguishing between motivational factors and
hygiene factors when considering motivation in work settings. He referred to factors that
cause job satisfaction as motivators and factors that could cause dissatisfaction as hygiene
factors.
Herzberg was the head of Case Western University's psychology department,
and he wrote the book Work and the Nature of Man in 1966 and a famous Harvard
Business Review article, "One More Time: How Do You Motivate Employees?" in
1968.10 Herzberg analyzed the factors that affected productivity among a sample
of 1,685 employees. Popular beliefs at the time were that work output was most
improved through larger salaries, more supervision, or a more attractive work
environment. According to Herzberg, these hygiene factors would cause dissatisfaction
if not present, but would not motivate workers to do more if present. Today,
professionals might also expect employers to provide health benefits, training, and
a computer or other equipment required to perform their jobs. Herzberg found that
people were motivated to work mostly by feelings of personal achievement and
recognition. Motivators, Herzberg concluded, included achievement, recognition, the
work itself, responsibility, advancement, and growth, as shown in Table 9-1.
Chapter 9
382
In his books and articles, Herzberg explained why companies could not instill
motivation by attempting to use positive factors such as reducing time spent at work,
increasing wages, offering fringe benefits, and providing human relations and sensitivity
training. He argued that people want to actualize themselves by being able to use their
creativity and work on challenging projects. They need stimuli to grow and advance, in
accordance with Maslow's hierarchy of needs. Factors such as achievement, recognition,
responsibility, advancement, and growth produce job satisfaction and are work motivators.
Hygiene Factors
Motivators
Larger salaries
Achievement
More supervision
Recognition
More attractive work environment
Work itself
Computer or other required equipment
Responsibility
Health benefits
Advancement
Training
Growth
Table 9-1  Examples of Herzberg's hygiene factors and motivators
M e d i a S n a p s h o t
Books and articles are written every year on the topic of human motivation. Videos are
also popular on this subject, especially one by Daniel Pink. RSA Animate used its popular
whiteboard drawing technique to summarize key points from Pink's book in a YouTube
video called "Drive: The surprising truth about what motivates us." Pink narrates the video,
summarizing several studies that suggest money often causes people to perform worse on
tasks that involve cognitive skills. He suggests that organizations should pay people enough
to eliminate resentments over money and stop using the carrot-and-stick approach to
motivation. Pink also suggests that managers focus on the following three motivators:

Autonomy: People like to be self-directed and have freedom in their work.
Maslow, Herzberg, and other researchers also found that people are motivated
by autonomy. Pink gives an example of how an Australian software company
called Atlassian lets people decide what they want to work on, and with whom,
for one day every quarter. Workers show the results of their work that day in a
fun meeting. This one day of total autonomy has produced a large number of
new products and fixes to problems.

Mastery: People like to improve their skills, such as playing an instrument,
participating in a sport, writing software, and mastering work-related activities.
Pink states that several products like UNIX, Apache, and Wikipedia were
created because people enjoyed the challenge and mastery involved.
(continued)
Project Resource Management
383
McClelland's Acquired-Needs Theory
David McClelland proposed that a person's specific needs are acquired or learned over time
and shaped by life experiences. The main categories of acquired needs include achievement,
affiliation, and power.12 Normally, one or two of these needs are dominant in people.

Achievement: People who have a high need for achievement (nAch) seek to
excel, and tend to avoid both low-risk and high-risk situations to improve their
chances for achieving something worthwhile. Achievers need regular feedback
and often prefer to work alone or with other high achievers. Managers should
give high achievers challenging projects with achievable goals. Achievers
should receive frequent performance feedback, and although money is not an
important motivator to them, it is an effective form of feedback.

Affiliation: People with a high need for affiliation (nAff) desire harmonious
relationships with other people and need to feel accepted by others. They
tend to conform to the norms of their work group and prefer work that
involves significant personal interaction. Managers should try to create a
cooperative work environment to meet the needs of people with a high need
for affiliation.

Power: People with a need for power (nPow) desire either personal power
or institutional power. People who need personal power want to direct
others and can be seen as bossy. People who need institutional power or
social power want to organize others to further the goals of the organization.
Management should provide such employees with the opportunity to manage
others, emphasizing the importance of meeting organizational goals.
The Thematic Apperception Test (TAT) is a tool to measure the individual needs of
different people using McClelland's categories. The TAT presents subjects with a series
of ambiguous pictures and asks them to develop a spontaneous story for each picture,
assuming they will project their own needs into the story.
McGregor's Theory X and Theory Y
Douglas McGregor was one of the great popularizers of a human relations approach
to management, and he is best known for developing Theory X and Theory Y. In his
research, documented in his 1960 book The Human Side of Enterprise, McGregor found
that although many managers spouted the right ideas, they actually followed a set of
assumptions about worker motivation that he called Theory X (sometimes referred to as
classical systems theory).13 People who believe in Theory X assume that workers dislike

Purpose: People want to work for a good purpose. When the profit motive
is separated from the purpose motive, people notice and do not perform
as well. Many great products were created for a purpose. For example, the
founder of Skype wanted to make the world a better place, and Steve Jobs, the
co-founder of Apple, wanted to put a "ding in the universe."11
Chapter 9
384
and avoid work if possible, so managers must use coercion, threats, and various control
schemes to have workers make adequate efforts to meet objectives. They assume that
the average worker wants to be directed and prefers to avoid responsibility, has little
ambition, and wants security above all else. Research clearly demonstrated that these
assumptions were not valid. McGregor suggested a different series of assumptions about
human behavior that he called Theory Y (sometimes referred to as human relations
theory). Managers who believe in Theory Y assume that employees do not inherently
dislike work, but consider it as natural as play or rest. The most significant rewards are
the satisfaction of esteem and self-actualization needs, as described by Maslow. McGregor
urged managers to motivate people based on Theory Y notions.
In 1981, William Ouchi introduced another approach to management in his book
Theory Z: How American Business Can Meet the Japanese Challenge.14 Theory Z
is based on the Japanese approach to motivating workers, which emphasizes trust,
quality, collective decision making, and cultural values. Whereas Theory X and Theory Y
emphasize how management views employees, Theory Z also describes how workers
perceive management. Theory Z workers, it is assumed, can be trusted to do their jobs to
their utmost ability, as long as management can be trusted to support them and look out
for their well-being. Theory Z emphasizes job rotation, broadening of skills, generalization
versus specialization, and the need for continuous training of workers.
Influence and Power
Many people working on a project do not report directly to project managers, and project
managers often do not have control over project staff who report to them. For example,
if they are given work assignments they do not like, many workers will simply quit or
transfer to other departments or projects. People are free to change jobs when they like.
H. J. Thamhain and D. L. Wilemon investigated the approaches that project managers
use to deal with workers and how those approaches relate to project success. They
identified nine influence bases that are available to project managers:
1. Authority: the legitimate hierarchical right to issue orders
2. Assignment: the project manager's perceived ability to influence a worker's
later work assignments
3. Budget: the project manager's perceived ability to authorize others' use of
discretionary funds
4. Promotion: the ability to improve a worker's position
5. Money: the ability to increase a worker's pay and benefits
6. Penalty: the project manager's perceived ability to dispense or cause
punishment
7.
Work challenge: the ability to assign work that capitalizes on a worker's
enjoyment of doing a particular task, which taps an intrinsic motivational factor
8. Expertise: the project manager's perceived special knowledge that others
deem important
9. Friendship: the ability to establish friendly personal relationships between
the project manager and others15
Project Resource Management
385
Top management grants authority to the project manager. However, assignment,
budget, promotion, money, and penalty influence bases are not automatically available
to project managers as part of their position. Others' perceptions are important in
establishing the usefulness of these influence bases. For example, any manager can
influence workers by providing challenging work; the ability to provide challenging work
(or take it away) is not a special ability of project managers. In addition, project managers
must earn the ability to influence by using expertise and friendship.
Thamhain and Wilemon found that projects were more likely to fail when project
managers relied too heavily on using authority, money, or penalty to influence people.
When project managers used work challenge and expertise to influence people, projects
were more likely to succeed. The effectiveness of work challenge in influencing people
is consistent with Maslow's and Herzberg's research on motivation. The importance of
expertise as a means of influencing people makes sense on projects that involve special
knowledge, as in most IT projects.
In 2013, Thamhain published a study of 72 global project teams, and the results again
showed that people issues have the strongest impact on project performance. Managers
cannot succeed by simply issuing work orders, preparing plans, or providing guidelines. They
must emphasize common values and goals to focus and unify global teams. "In particular, the
field study shows that certain conditions related to the people side, such as personal interest,
pride and satisfaction with the work, professional work challenge, accomplishments and
recognition, appear most favorable toward unifying culturally diverse project teams and their
work processes. These conditions serve as a bridging mechanism between organizational
goals and personal interests, between central control and local management norms, and
between following a project plan and adaptive problem solving. These are some of the
conditions crucial to project success in complex multi-cultural organizations."16
Influence is related to power, which is the ability to influence behavior to get people
to do things they would not otherwise do. Power is much stronger than influence, because
it is often used to force people to change their behavior. There are five main types of
power, according to French and Raven's classic study, "The Bases of Social Power."17

Coercive power involves using punishment, threats, or other negative
approaches to get people to do things they do not want to do. This type
of power is similar to Thamhain and Wilemon's influence category called
penalty. For example, a project manager can threaten to fire workers or
subcontractors to try to get them to change their behavior. If the project
manager really has the power to fire people, he or she could follow through
on the threat. Recall, however, that influencing by using penalties is
correlated with unsuccessful projects. Still, coercive power can be very
effective in stopping negative behavior. For example, if students tend to hand
in assignments late, an instructor can have a policy in the syllabus for late
penalties, such as a 20 percent grade reduction for each day an assignment is
late. Workers' pay can be docked if they arrive late for work, or they might be
fired if they arrive late more than once.

Legitimate power is getting people to do things based on a position of
authority. This type of power is similar to the authority basis of influence.
If top management gives project managers organizational authority, they
Chapter 9
386
can use legitimate power in several situations. They can make key decisions
without involving the project team, for example. Overemphasis on legitimate
power or authority also correlates with project failure.

Expert power involves using personal knowledge and expertise to get people
to change their behavior. People who perceive that project managers are
experts in certain situations will follow their suggestions. For example, if a
project manager has expertise in working with a particular IT supplier and its
products, the project team will be more likely to follow the project manager's
suggestions on how to work with that vendor and its products.

Reward power involves using incentives to induce people to do things.
Rewards can include money, status, recognition, promotions, and special
work assignments. Many motivation theorists suggest that only certain types
of rewards, such as work challenge, achievement, and recognition, truly
induce people to change their behavior or work hard.

Referent power is based on a person's own charisma. People who have
referent power are held in very high regard; others will do what they
say based on that regard. People such as Martin Luther King, Jr., John
F. Kennedy, and Bill Clinton had referent power. Very few people possess
the natural charisma that underlies referent power.
It is important for project managers to understand what types of influence and power
they can use in different situations. New project managers often overemphasize their
position-their legitimate power or authority influence-especially when dealing with
project team members or support staff. They also neglect the importance of reward power
or work challenge influence. People often respond much better to a project manager who
motivates them with challenging work and provides positive reinforcement for doing a
good job. Project managers should understand the basic concepts of influence and power,
and should practice using them to their own advantage and to help their teams.
Covey and Improving Effectiveness
Stephen Covey, author of The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People: Powerful Lessons
in Personal Change,18 expanded on the work done by Maslow, Herzberg, and others
to develop an approach for helping people and teams become more effective. Covey's
first three habits of effective people-be proactive, begin with the end in mind, and put
first things first-help people achieve a private victory by becoming independent. After
achieving independence, people can then strive for interdependence by developing the
next three habits-think win/win; seek first to understand, then to be understood; and
synergize. (Synergy is the concept that the whole is equal to more than the sum of its
parts.) Finally, everyone can work on Covey's seventh habit-sharpen the saw-to develop
and renew their physical, spiritual, mental, social, and emotional selves.
Project managers can apply Covey's seven habits to improve effectiveness on projects,
as follows:
1. Be proactive. Covey, like Maslow, believes that people have the ability to be
proactive and choose their responses to different situations. Project managers
must be proactive in anticipating and planning for problems and inevitable
Project Resource Management
387
changes on projects. They can also encourage their team members to be
proactive in working on their project activities.
2. Begin with the end in mind. Covey suggests that people focus on their values,
what they want to accomplish, and how they want to be remembered in their
lives. He suggests writing a mission statement to help achieve this habit.
Many organizations and projects have mission statements that help them
focus on their main purpose.
3. Put first things first. Covey developed a time management system and
matrix to help people prioritize their time. He suggests that most people need
to spend more time doing things that are important, but not urgent. Such
activities include planning, reading, and exercising. Project managers need
to spend a lot of time working on important but not urgent activities, such as
developing various project plans, building relationships with major project
stakeholders, and mentoring project team members. They also need to avoid
focusing only on important and urgent activities-putting out fires.
4. Think win/win. Covey presents several paradigms of interdependence;
think win/win is the best choice in most situations. When you use a win/win
paradigm, parties in potential conflict work together to develop new solutions
that benefit all parties. Project managers should strive to use a win/win
approach in making decisions, but in competitive situations they sometimes
must use a win/lose paradigm.
5. Seek first to understand, then to be understood. Empathic listening is
listening with the intent to understand. It is more powerful than active
listening because you set aside your personal interests and focus on truly
understanding the other person. When you practice empathic listening, you
can begin two-way communication. This habit is critical for project managers
so they can understand their stakeholders' needs and expectations.
6. Synergize. A project team can synergize by creating collaborative products
that are much better than a collection of individual efforts. Covey also
emphasizes the importance of valuing differences in others to achieve
synergy. Synergy is essential to many highly technical projects; in fact,
several major breakthroughs in IT occurred because of synergy. For example,
in his Pulitzer Prize-winning book, The Soul of a New Machine, Tracy Kidder
documented the synergistic efforts of a team of Data General researchers to
create a new 32-bit superminicomputer during the 1970s.19
7. Sharpen the saw. When you practice sharpening the saw, you take time to
renew yourself physically, spiritually, mentally, and socially. The practice
of self-renewal helps people avoid burnout. Project managers must make
sure that they and their project teams have time to retrain, reenergize,
and occasionally even relax to avoid burnout. A simple technique like
encouraging people to stand up and walk around for a brief time every hour
can improve physical health and mental performance.
Douglas Ross, author of Applying Covey's Seven Habits to a Project Management
Career, related Covey's habits to project management. Ross suggests that Habit 5-Seek
Chapter 9
388
first to understand, then to be understood-differentiates good project managers from
average or poor ones. People have a tendency to focus on their own agendas instead of
first trying to understand other people's points of view. Empathic listening can help project
managers and team members find out what motivates different people. Understanding what
motivates key stakeholders and customers can mean the difference between a project's
success or failure. Once project managers and team members begin to practice empathic
listening, they can communicate and work together to tackle problems more effectively.20
Before you can practice empathic listening, you first have to get people to talk to you.
In many cases, you must work on developing a rapport with the other person. Rapport is a
relation of harmony, conformity, accord, or affinity. Without rapport, people cannot begin
to communicate. For example, in the chapter's opening case, Ben was not ready to talk to
anyone from the IT department, even if Ed and Sarah were ready to listen. Ben was angry
about the lack of support he received from the IT department and bullied anyone who
reminded him of that group. Before Sarah could begin to communicate with Ben, she had
to establish rapport.
One technique for establishing rapport is mirroring. Mirroring is matching certain
behaviors of the other person. People tend to like others who are like themselves, and
mirroring helps you take on some of the other person's characteristics. It also helps
them realize if they are behaving unreasonably, as in the chapter's opening case. You
can mirror someone's tone and tempo of voice, breathing, movements, or body postures.
After Ben started yelling at her, Sarah quickly decided to mirror his voice tone, tempo,
and body posture. She stood nose to nose with Ben and started yelling back at him. This
action made Ben realize what he was doing, and it also made him notice and respect
his colleague from the IT department. Once Ben overcame his anger, he could start
communicating his needs. In most cases, however, such extreme measures are not
needed, and mirroring must be used with caution. When done improperly or with the
wrong person, it could result in very negative consequences.
A d v i c e f o r Y o u n g P r o f e s s i o n a l s
Unfortunately, many people stereotype IT professionals as having poor soft skills and not
caring much about other people's feelings. This makes it even more important to develop
and use your empathy skills. There are several books, videos, and classes on this subject.
For example, MindTools provides the following advice:
To start using empathy more effectively, consider the following:
1. Put aside your viewpoint, and try to see things from the other person's point of view.
When you do this, you'll realize that other people most likely aren't being
evil, unkind, stubborn, or unreasonable - they're probably just reacting to the
situation with the knowledge they have.
2. Validate the other person's perspective.
Once you "see" why others believe what they believe, acknowledge it. Remember:
acknowledgement does not always equal agreement. You can accept that people
(continued)
Project Resource Management
389
Recall the importance of getting users involved in IT projects. For organizations
to be truly effective in IT project management, they must find ways to help users and
developers of information systems work together. It is widely accepted that organizations
make better project decisions when business professionals and IT staff collaborate. It is
also widely accepted that this task is easier said than done. Many companies have been
very successful in integrating technology and business departments, but many other
companies continue to struggle with this issue.
Emotional Intelligence
As the title suggests, Howard Gardner's book Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple
Intelligences introduced the concept of using more than one way to think of and
measure human intelligence. Gardner suggested the need to develop both interpersonal
intelligence (the capacity to understand the motivations, intentions, and desires of
others) and intrapersonal intelligence (the capacity to understand oneself, one's feelings,
and motivations). Empathic listening is an example of interpersonal intelligence, while
knowing that you have a high need for achievement is an example of intrapersonal
intelligence. The concept emotional intelligence-knowing and managing one's own
emotions and understanding the emotions of others for improved performance-became
popular in 1995 when Daniel Goleman's book, Emotional Intelligence, became a
best-seller.
Several articles and books have been written on the need for project managers to
develop their emotional intelligence (EI). For example, Anthony C. Mersino, PMP, author
of Emotional Intelligence for Project Managers: The People Skills You Need to Achieve
Outstanding Results, says that EI comes into play as project managers work on team
building, collaboration, negotiation, and relationship development. EI is also becoming a
have different opinions from your own, and that they may have good reason to
hold those opinions.
3. Examine your attitude.
Are you more concerned with getting your way, winning, or being right? Or,
is your priority to find a solution, build relationships, and accept others?
Without an open mind and attitude, you probably won't have enough room for
empathy.
4. Listen to the entire message that the other person is trying to communicate.

Listen with your ears - what is being said, and what tone is being used?

Listen with your eyes - what is the person doing with his or her body while
speaking?

Listen with your instincts - do you sense that the person is not communicat-
ing something important?

Listen with your heart - what do you think the other person feels?
5. Ask what the other person would do.
When in doubt, ask the person to explain his or her position. This is probably
the simplest, and most direct, way to understand the other person. However, it's
probably the least used way to develop empathy.21
Chapter 9
390
more sought-after characteristic. According to a CareerBuilder.com survey of over 2,600
U.S. hiring managers and human resource professionals,

71 percent said they value EI in an employee more than IQ.

59 percent said they would not hire someone who has a high IQ but low EI.

75 percent said they are more likely to promote an employee with high EI
than an employee with a high IQ.22
Leadership
As defined in Chapter 1, a leader focuses on long-term goals and big-picture objectives
while inspiring people to reach those goals. Leadership is a soft skill, and there is
no one best way to be a leader. Peter Northouse, author of a popular textbook called
Leadership: Theory and Practice, says, "In the past 60 years, as many as 65 different
classification systems have been developed to define the dimensions of leadership."23
Some classification systems focus on group processes, while others focus on personality
traits or behaviors. People discuss transformational leaders, transactional leaders, and
servant leaders, to name a few. There are many different leadership styles, and the one
thing most experts agree on is that the best leaders are able to adapt their style to needs of
the situation.
Daniel Goleman, author of Primal Leadership, points out that "The goal for leaders
should be to develop a solid understanding of the different styles of leadership and their
implications, and reach the point where choosing the right one for the situation becomes
second nature to them."24
W h a t W e n t R i g h t ?
It's important for professional societies to stay abreast of skills needed in their
profession. In 2015, PMI acknowledged that project management professionals need
to be continually updating their skills by developing a new Continuing Certification
Requirements (CCR) program. Applicants who want to renew a PMI certification must
now demonstrate ongoing professional development that meets the new PMI Talent
Triangle. As described in Chapter 1, this triangle includes the following:

Technical project management: Knowledge, skills, and behaviors related to spe-
cific domains of project, program, and portfolio management

Strategic and business management: Knowledge of and expertise in the indus-
try or organization that enhances performance and better delivers business
outcomes

Leadership: Knowledge, skills, and behaviors specific to leadership-oriented,
cross-cutting skills that help an organization achieve its business goals
(continued)
Project Resource Management
391
It is important to understand and pay attention to concepts of motivation, influence,
power, effectiveness, emotional intelligence, and leadership in all project processes. It is
also important to remember that projects operate within an organizational environment.
The challenge comes from applying the preceding theories to the many unique people
involved in particular projects.
Many important topics related to motivation, influence, power, effectiveness,
emotional intelligence, and leadership are relevant to project management. Projects are
done by and for people, so it is important for project managers and team members to
understand and practice key concepts related to these topics. Remember that everyone
prefers to work with people they like and respect, and it is important to treat others with
respect, regardless of their title or position. This is especially true for people in support
roles, such as administrative assistants, security guards, or members of the cleaning crew.
You never know when you may need their help at a critical point in a project.
Developing the Resource Management Plan
and Team Charter
To develop a resource management plan for a project, you must identify and document
project resources, roles, responsibilities, skills, and reporting relationships. The project
resource management plan can be separated into a human resource management plan
and a physical resource management plan. The human resource plan often includes an
organizational chart for the project, detailed information on roles and responsibilities,
and a staffing management plan. In addition, project teams can create a team charter to
provide guidance on how they will operate.
Before creating an organizational chart or any part of the human resource plan for
a project, top management and the project manager must identify what types of people
the project needs to ensure success. If the key to success lies in having the best Java
programmers you can find, planning should reflect that need. If the real key to success is
having a top-notch project manager and respected team leaders, that need should drive
human resource planning.
PMI has always emphasized the need to stay abreast of technical project manage-
ment, but now it is placing more emphasis on strategic and business management
as well as leadership skills. PMI often surveys individuals and organizations, and in a
recent report, 75 percent of organizations ranked leadership skills as most important for
successful navigation of complexity in projects. "Managing complex projects requires
project managers who are able to establish the vision, mission and expected outcomes
in a way that is broad enough to be complete yet simple enough to understand. It also
requires the skill to align the team to that vision. These are project managers who
have become project executives with the leadership skill and business acumen to drive
success."25
Chapter 9
392
Project Organizational Charts
Recall from Chapter 2 that the nature of IT projects often means that project team
members come from different backgrounds and possess a wide variety of skills. Also recall
that organizations have many types of structures (functional, matrix, etc.). It can be very
difficult to manage such a diverse group of people, so it is important to provide a clear
organizational structure for a project. After identifying important skills and the types of
people needed to staff a project, the project manager should work with top management
and project team members to create an organizational chart for the project. Figure 9-3
provides part of an organizational chart for a large project that involves hardware and
software development. For example, in the chapter's opening case, a program manager
might be in charge of every project related to the F-44 aircraft, and each major component
of the aircraft, like the radar system, might have its own dedicated project manager. Note
that the project personnel include a deputy project manager, subproject managers, and
teams. Other boxes on the chart represent each functional department supporting the
project, such as systems engineering, quality assurance, and configuration management,
as well as an external independent test group. Deputy project managers fill in for
project managers in their absence and assist them as needed. Subproject managers are
responsible for managing the subprojects into which a large project might be divided.
For example, an aircraft radar upgrade project could involve several major software
(S/W) upgrades as well as hardware (H/W) upgrades, so a subproject manager could be
in charge of each upgrade. This structure is typical for large projects that use a matrix
organizational structure. When many people work on a project, clearly defining and
allocating project work is essential. (For example, visit the Companion website for
this text to see the project organizational chart that Northwest Airlines used for its
large Resnet project.) Smaller projects usually do not have deputy project managers or
Figure 9-3  Sample organizational chart for a large IT project
Project Manager
Deputy Project
Manager
Project Technical
Lead
Independent
Test Group
Quality
Assurance
Conﬁguration
Management
Systems
Engineering
S/W Subproject
Manager 2
S/W Subproject
Manager 1
Team 1
Team 1
Team 2
Team 2
Team 1
Team 2
Team 3
H/W Subproject
Manager
Project Resource Management
393
subproject managers. On smaller projects, the project managers might have team leaders
reporting directly to them.
In addition to defining an organizational structure for a project, it is also important
to follow a work definition and assignment process. Figure 9-4 provides a framework for
defining and assigning work that consists of four steps:
1. Finalizing the project requirements
2. Defining how the work will be accomplished
3. Breaking down the work into manageable elements
4. Assigning work responsibilities
The work definition and assignment process is carried out during the proposal and
startup phases of a project. Note that the process is iterative, often taking more than
one pass. A Request for Proposal (RFP) or draft contract often provides the basis for
defining and finalizing work requirements, which are then documented in a final contract
and technical baseline. If the project does not require an RFP, then the internal project
charter and scope statement would provide the basis for defining and finalizing work
requirements, as described in Chapter 5, Project Scope Management. The project team
leaders then decide on a technical approach for how to do the work. Should work be
broken down using a product-oriented approach or a phased approach? Will the project
team outsource some of the work or subcontract to other companies? Once the project
team has decided on a technical approach, it develops a work breakdown structure (WBS)
to establish manageable elements of work, as described in Chapter 5. The team then
develops activity definitions for the work involved in each activity on the WBS, as you
learned in Chapter 6, Project Schedule Management. The last step is assigning the work.
Once the project manager and project team have broken down the work into
manageable elements, the project manager assigns work to organizational units. The
project manager often bases these work assignments on where the work fits in the
Figure 9-4  Work definition and assignment process
RFP, Contract, Charter,
Scope Statement
Steps
Key Outputs
Requirements Finalization
Finalized Project Scope Baseline
Finalized Technical Baseline
How Work Will Be Done
Program/Team Approach
Technical Approaches
Break Down the Work
Work Breakdown Structure (WBS)
Activity Deﬁnitions
Assign the Work
Organizational Breakdown
Structure (OBS)
OBS Responsibilities
Chapter 9
394
organization and uses an organizational breakdown structure to conceptualize the process.
An organizational breakdown structure (OBS) is a specific type of organizational chart
that shows which organizational units are responsible for which work items. The OBS
can be based on a general organizational chart and then broken down into more detail,
based on specific units within departments in the company or units in any subcontracted
companies. For example, OBS categories might include software development, hardware
development, and training.
Responsibility Assignment Matrices
After developing an OBS, the project manager can develop a responsibility assignment
matrix. A responsibility assignment matrix (RAM) maps the work of the project, as
described in the WBS, to the people responsible for performing the work, as described in
the OBS. Figure 9-5 shows an example of a RAM. The RAM allocates work to responsible
and performing organizations, teams, or individuals, depending on the desired level of
detail. For smaller projects, it is best to assign individual people to WBS activities. For
very large projects, it is more effective to assign the work to organizational units or teams,
as shown in Figure 9-5.
In addition to using a RAM to assign detailed work activities, you can use it to
define general roles and responsibilities on projects. This type of RAM can include the
stakeholders in the project. Some organizations use RACI charts to show four key roles
for project stakeholders:

Responsibility: Who does the task?

Accountability: Who signs off on the task or has authority for it?

Consultation: Who has information necessary to complete the task?

Informed: Who needs to be notified of task status and results?
As shown in Table 9-2, a RACI chart lists tasks vertically and lists individuals or
groups horizontally. Each intersecting cell contains an R, an A, a C, or an I. A task may
have multiple R, C, or I entries, but there can be only one A entry per row to clarify who
Figure 9-5  Sample responsibility assignment matrix (RAM)
WBS activities
Systems Engineering
Software Development
Hardware Development
Test Engineering
Quality Assurance
Conﬁguration Management
Integrated Logistics Support
Training
1.1.1 1.1.2 1.1.3 1.1.4 1.1.5 1.1.6 1.1.7 1.1.8
R
R P
R P
R P
P
R P
R P
P
R P
R
OBS
units
R = Responsible organizational unit
P = Performing organizational unit
Project Resource Management
395
is accountable for each task. For example, a mechanic is responsible for repairing a car,
but the shop owner is accountable for the repairs being made properly. The car owner and
parts supplier would be other stakeholders with various roles for different work activities,
as shown in Table 9-2. Project managers can use the RACI codes or any other codes to
help clarify the roles that different organizational units or specific stakeholders have in
getting the work done.
Staffing Management Plans and Resource Histograms
A staffing management plan describes when and how people will be added to the project
team and taken off it. The level of detail may vary based on the type of project. For
example, if an IT project is expected to need 100 people on average over a year, the staffing
management plan would describe the types of people needed to work on the project, such
as Java programmers, business analysts, and technical writers, and the number of each
type of person needed each month. The plan would also describe how these resources
would be acquired, trained, rewarded, and reassigned after the project. All of these issues
are important to meeting the needs of the project, the employees, and the organization.
The staffing management plan often includes a resource histogram, which is a
column chart that shows the number of resources assigned to a project over time.
Figure 9-6 provides an example of a histogram that might be used for a six-month
IT project. Notice that the columns represent the number of people needed in each
area-managers, business analysts, programmers, and technical writers. By stacking
the columns, you can see the total number of people needed each month. You can also
create a resource histogram for physical resources. For example, if a project involved
a lot of training, there would be a need to plan for the classroom space and supplies
needed for that part of the project. After determining the resource needs, the next step
in project resource management is to acquire resources.
Team Charters*
Many companies believe in using team charters to help promote teamwork and clarify
team communications. (Note that some organizations and previous editions of this text
use the term team contract instead of team charter. PMI just added team charters to the
PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition in 2017.) After core project team members have been
Car Owner
Shop Owner
Mechanic
Parts Supplier
Pay for parts and
services
A, R
C
Determine parts and
services needed
C
A, R
C
Supply parts
C
C
A, R
Install parts
I
A
R
Table 9-2  Sample RACI chart
Chapter 9
396
selected, they meet to prepare a team charter to guide how the team will function. The
process normally includes reviewing a template and then working in small groups of three
to four people to prepare inputs for the team charter. Creating smaller groups makes it
easier for everyone to contribute ideas. Each group then shares their ideas on what the
charter should contain, and then they work together to form one project team charter.
Ideally, the charter should be finished in a one- to two-hour meeting. The project manager
should attend the meeting and act as a coach or facilitator, observing the different
personalities of team members and seeing how well they work together. It is crucial to
emphasize the importance of the project team throughout the project's life cycle, and the
team charter should be updated as needed.
Contents of the team charter, according to PMI, may include the following:

Team values

Communication guidelines

Decision-making criteria and process

Conflict resolution process

Meeting guidelines

Team agreements
Estimating Activity Resources
The nature of the project and the organization will affect resource estimates. Expert
judgment, various estimating approaches, data analysis, project management software,
and meetings are tools that can assist in resource estimating. The people who help
determine what resources are necessary must have experience and expertise in similar
projects and with the organization performing the project.
Figure 9-6  Sample resource histogram
Jan
0
Number of People
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Feb
March
April
May
June
Managers
Business analysts
Programmers
Technical writers
Project Resource Management
397
Important questions to answer when estimating activity resources include the following:

How difficult will specific activities be on this project?

Is anything unique in the project's scope statement that will affect resources?

What is the organization's history in doing similar activities? Has the
organization done similar tasks before? What level of personnel did
the work?

Does the organization have people, equipment, and materials that are
capable and available for performing the work? Could any organizational
policies affect the availability of resources?

Does the organization need to acquire more resources to accomplish the work?
Would it make sense to outsource some of the work? Will outsourcing increase
or decrease the amount of resources needed and when they will be available?
Answering these questions requires important inputs such as the project management
plan, project documents, enterprise environmental factors, and organizational process
assets such as policies regarding staffing and outsourcing. During the early phases of a
project, the project team may not know which specific people, equipment, and materials
will be available. For example, the team might know from past projects that a mix of
experienced and inexperienced programmers will work on a project. The team might also
be able to approximate the number of people or hours needed to perform specific activities.
It is important to thoroughly brainstorm and evaluate alternatives related to
resources, especially on projects that involve people from multiple disciplines and
companies. Because most projects involve many human resources and the majority
of costs are for salaries and benefits, it is often effective to solicit ideas from different
people to help develop alternatives and address resource-related issues early in a
project. The resource estimates should also be updated as more detailed information
becomes available.
The main outputs of the resource estimating process include a list of activity
resource requirements, a basis of estimates, a resource breakdown structure, and
project documents updates. A resource breakdown structure is a hierarchical
structure that identifies the project's resources by category and type. Resource
categories might include analysts, programmers, and testers. This information would
be helpful in determining resource costs, acquiring resources, and so on. For example,
if junior employees will be assigned to many activities, the project manager might
request that additional activities, time, and resources be approved to help train and
mentor those employees. In addition to providing the basis for estimating activity
durations as described in Chapter 6, Project Schedule Management, estimating activity
resources provides vital information for project cost estimates (Chapter 7), project
communications management (Chapter 10), project risk management (Chapter 11),
and project procurement management (Chapter 12).
Acquiring Resources
During the late 1990s, the IT job market became extremely competitive. It was a
seller's market with corporations competing fiercely for a shrinking pool of qualified,
experienced IT professionals. In the early 2000s, the market declined tremendously,
Chapter 9
398
so employers could be very selective in recruiting. Today, many organizations again
face a shortage of IT staff. Regardless of the current job market, however, acquiring
qualified IT professionals is critical. There is a saying that the project manager who
is the smartest person on the team has done a poor job of recruiting. In addition
to recruiting team members, it is also important to acquire the necessary physical
resources (facilities, equipment, supplies, and so on) and provide the right type
of resources at the right time and place. This section addresses important topics
related to acquiring the project resources: resource assignment, resource loading, and
resource leveling.
Resource Assignment
After developing resource requirements, project managers must work with other people
in their organizations to assign them to their projects or to acquire additional human or
physical resources needed for the project. Project managers with strong influencing and
negotiating skills are often good at getting the best resources for their projects. However,
the organization must ensure that resources are assigned to the projects that best fit the
needs of the organization.
Organizations that do a good job of staff acquisition have good staffing plans. These
plans describe the number and type of people who are currently in the organization and
the number and type of people anticipated to be needed for the project based on current
and upcoming activities. An important component of staffing plans is maintaining a
complete and accurate inventory of employees' skills. If there is a mismatch between the
current mix of people's skills and needs of the organization, it is the project manager's
job to work with top management, human resource managers, and other people in the
organization to address staffing and training needs.
It is also important to have good procedures in place for hiring subcontractors
and recruiting new employees. Because the Human Resource department is normally
responsible for hiring people, project managers must work with their human resource
managers to address any problems in recruiting appropriate people. It is also a priority to
address retention issues, especially for IT professionals.
One innovative approach to hiring and retaining IT staff is to offer existing
employees incentives for helping recruit and retain personnel. For example, several
consulting companies give their employees one dollar for every hour worked by a new
person they helped recruit. This provides an incentive for current employees to help
attract new people and to keep all of them working at the company. Another approach
to attract and retain IT professionals is to provide benefits based on personal need. For
example, some people might want to work only four days a week or have the option
of working a couple of days a week from home. As it becomes more difficult to find
good IT professionals, organizations must become more innovative and proactive in
addressing this issue.
It is very important to consider the needs of individuals and the organization when
making recruiting and retention decisions and to study the best practices of leading
companies in these areas. It is also important to address a growing trend in project
teams-many team members work in a virtual environment. See the section on managing
the project team for suggestions on working with virtual team members.
Project Resource Management
399
Resource Loading
Chapter 6, Project Schedule Management, described using network diagrams to help
manage a project's schedule. One of the problems or dangers inherent in scheduling
processes is that they often do not address the issues of resource utilization and
availability. This is why the development of critical chain scheduling is so important.
Schedules tend to focus primarily on time rather than both time and resources, which
includes people. An important measure of a project manager's success is how well he or
she balances the trade-offs among performance, time, and cost. During a period of crisis, it
is occasionally possible to add resources-such as additional staff-to a project at little or
no cost. Most of the time, however, resolving performance, time, and cost trade-offs entails
additional costs to the organization. The project manager's goal must be to achieve project
B e s t P r a c t i c e
Best practices can also include the best places for people to work. Fortune magazine
publishes a list of the "100 Best Companies to Work For" in the United States every year,
with Google taking top honors for the eighth time in 2017. Companies want to make
the list and be known for being a great place to work, and people are drawn to work for
companies on the list. Working Mothers magazine lists the best companies in the
United States for women based on benefits for working families. The Times online
(www.timesonline.co.uk) provides the London Sunday Times list of the "100 Best
Companies to Work For," a key benchmark against which U.K. companies can judge their
performance as employers. The Great Place to Work Institute, which produces Fortune
magazine's "100 Best Companies to Work For," uses the same selection methodology
for more than 20 international lists, including all 15 countries of the European Union,
Brazil, Korea, and a number of other countries throughout Latin America and Asia.
Companies make these lists based on feedback from their best critics: their own
employees. Quotes from employees often show why their companies made the lists:

"Working here can make you feel that you've made it into the technical
equivalent of Major League Baseball or the NFL-you're at the top of your
field." #1: Google

"Although people come from across the world, from different cultures, and
from different life experiences," one employee says, "everyone shares a
passion for problem-solving and a positive attitude about teamwork." #2:
Boston Consulting Group

"Our health insurance benefits are awesome, our schedules are flexible and
we can keep our bodies healthy at our gym," says one team member. "ACUITY
takes not only good care of me, but also my family." #3: ACUITY

"SAS has provisions to support you at whatever stage of life you are in - child
care for your newborn to preschooler, resources for dealing with your teenager
and college planning, help with your elderly parent," says one employee. "More
importantly, a real sense of community is built when people work together for
so long." #4: SAS26
Chapter 9
400
success without increasing the costs or time required to complete the project. The key to
accomplishing this goal is effectively managing human resources on the project.
Once resources are assigned to projects, two techniques are available to help use
them most effectively: resource loading and resource leveling. Resource loading refers to
the amount of individual resources that an existing schedule requires during specific time
periods. Resource loading helps project managers understand the demands of a project on
the organization's resources and on individual people's schedules. Project managers often
use resource histograms, like the one shown in Figure 9-6, to depict period-by-period
variations in resource loading. A resource histogram can be very helpful in determining
resource needs or in identifying staffing problems.
A resource histogram can also show when work is being overallocated to a certain
person or group. Overallocation means that not enough resources are available to
perform the assigned work during a given time period. Figure 9-7 shows a sample resource
histogram created in Microsoft Project. This histogram illustrates how much one person,
Joe Franklin, is assigned to work on the project each week. The numbers on the vertical
axis represent the percentage of Joe's available time that is allocated for him to work on
the project. The top horizontal axis represents time in weeks. Note that Joe Franklin
is overallocated most of the time. For example, for most of March and April and part of
May, Joe's work allocation is 300 percent of his available time. If Joe is normally available
8 hours per day, this means he would have to work 24 hours a day to meet this staffing
projection!
Overallocation can happen for many reasons. Many people don't use the resource
assignment features of project management software properly. You also need to provide
good estimates of how many hours are required to accomplish work. As mentioned in
Chapter 6, Project Schedule Management, a typical worker does productive work between
Figure 9-7  Sample histogram showing an overallocated person
Project Resource Management
401
70 and 80 percent of the time. If people are assigned to work for 40 hours in a week, you
should estimate that they will accomplish 28 to 32 hours of productive work. Of course,
there are exceptions to this rule of thumb, but it is unrealistic to assume that all workers
are productive 100 percent of the time.
Resource Leveling
Resource leveling is a technique for resolving resource conflicts by delaying tasks. It is
a form of network analysis in which resource management concerns drive scheduling
decisions (start and finish dates). The main purpose of resource leveling is to create a
smoother distribution of resource usage. Project managers examine the network diagram
for areas of slack or float, and to identify resource conflicts. For example, you can
sometimes remove overallocations by delaying noncritical tasks, which does not result in
an overall schedule delay. At other times, you will need to delay the project completion date
to reduce or remove overallocations. Appendix A (available on the Companion website for
this text) explains how to use Microsoft Project 2016 to level resources using both of these
approaches. You can also view resource leveling as addressing the resource constraints
described in critical chain scheduling (see Chapter 6, Project Schedule Management).
Overallocation is one type of resource conflict. If a certain resource is overallocated,
the project manager can change the schedule to remove resource overallocation. If a
certain resource is underallocated, the project manager can change the schedule to
try to improve the use of the resource. Resource leveling, therefore, aims to minimize
period-by-period variations in resource loading by shifting tasks within their slack
allowances.
Figure 9-8 illustrates a simple example of resource leveling. The network diagram
at the top of this figure shows that Activities A, B, and C can all start at the same time.
Activity A has a duration of two days and will take two people to complete; Activity B has
a duration of five days and will take four people to complete; and Activity C has a duration
of three days and will take two people to complete. The histogram in the lower-left corner
of this figure shows the resource usage if all activities start on day one. The histogram
in the lower-right corner shows the resource usage if Activity C is delayed two days, its
total slack allowance. Notice that the lower-right histogram is flat or leveled; that is, its
activities are arranged to take up the least space, saving days and number of workers. You
may recognize this strategy from the computer game Tetris, in which you earn points for
keeping the falling shapes as level as possible. In the same way, resources are used best
when they are leveled.
Resource leveling has several benefits. First, when resources are used on a more
constant basis, they require less management. For example, it is much easier to manage
someone who is scheduled to work 20 hours per week on a project for the next three
months than it is to manage the same person for 10 hours one week, 40 the next, 5 the
next, and so on.
Second, resource leveling may enable project managers to use a just-in-time
inventory type of policy for subcontractors or other expensive resources. For example, a
project manager might want to level resources for work that must be done by particular
subcontractors such as testing consultants. This leveling might allow the project to use
four outside consultants full time to perform testing for four months instead of spreading
Chapter 9
402
out the work over more time or using more than four people. The latter approach is
usually more expensive. Recall from Chapter 6 that crashing and fast tracking can also be
used along with resource allocation to improve a project schedule.
Third, resource leveling results in fewer problems for project personnel and accounting
departments. Increasing and decreasing labor levels and human resources often produce
additional work and confusion. For example, if people with expertise in the same area
are only assigned to a project two days a week and they need to work together, then the
schedule needs to reflect this need. The Accounting department might complain when
subcontractors charge a higher rate for billing less than 20 hours a week on a project. The
accountants will remind project managers to strive to get the lowest rates possible.
Finally, resource leveling often improves morale. People like to have stability in their
jobs. It is very stressful for people not to know what projects they will be working on from
week to week or even from day to day.
Project management software can automatically level resources. However, the project
manager must be careful in using the results without making adjustments. Automatic
leveling often pushes out the project's completion date. Resources may also be reallocated
Figure 9-8  Resource leveling example
Project network with Activities A,
B, and C and durations as shown.
Activity A has 3 days of slack, and
Activity C has 2 days of slack.
Assume Activity A has 2 workers,
B has 4 workers, and C has 2 workers.
2
4
6
8
2
4
6
8
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
Workers
Workers
C
A
B
A
B
B
B
C
C
Resource usage if all
activities start on day one
Resource usage if Activity C
is delayed 2 days, its total slack
4
2
3
A = 2 days
B = 5 days
C = 3 days
Days
Days
1
Project Resource Management
403
to work at times that are inappropriate with other constraints. To ensure that the leveling
is done appropriately, a wise project manager would have his or her work checked by a
team member who is proficient in using the project management software.
Developing the Project Team
Even if a project manager has successfully recruited enough skilled people to work on
a project, the project manager must ensure that people can work together as a team to
achieve project goals. Many IT projects have talented people working on them, but it takes
teamwork to complete most projects successfully. The main goal of team development is
to help people work together more effectively to improve project performance.
First published in 1965 and modified in the 1970s, Dr. Bruce Tuckman's model of
team development remains relevant today. The Tuckman model describes five stages of
team development:
1. Forming involves the introduction of team members, either at the initiation
of the team or as new members are introduced. This stage is necessary, but
little work is actually achieved.
2. Storming occurs when team members have different opinions for how the
team should operate. People test each other, and there is often conflict within
the team.
3. Norming is achieved when team members have developed a common
working method, and cooperation and collaboration replace the conflict and
mistrust of the previous phase.
4. Performing occurs when the emphasis is on reaching the team's goals rather
than working on team process. Relationships are settled, and team members
are likely to build loyalty toward each other. At this stage, the team is able to
manage tasks that are more complex and cope with greater change.
5. Adjourning involves the break-up of the team after it successfully reaches its
goals and completes the work.27
There is an extensive body of literature on team development. This section highlights a
few important tools and techniques for team development, including training, team-building
activities, and reward and recognition systems.
Training
Project managers often recommend that people take specific training courses to improve
individual and team development. For example, Sarah from the opening case had gone
through training in emotional intelligence and dealing with difficult people. She was
familiar with the mirroring technique and felt comfortable using that approach with Ben.
Many other people would not have reacted so quickly and effectively in the same situation.
If Ben and Sarah did reach agreement on what actions they could take to resolve the F-44
aircraft program's IT problems, it might result in a new project to develop and deliver a
new system for Ben's group. If Sarah became the project manager for this new project, she
would understand the need for special training in interpersonal skills for specific people in
Chapter 9
404
her department and Ben's. Individual team members could take special training classes to
improve their interpersonal skills. If Sarah thought the whole project team could benefit
from taking training together to learn to work as a team, she could arrange for a special
team-building session for the entire project team and key stakeholders.
It is very important to provide training in a just-in-time fashion. For example, if Sarah
were preparing for a technical assignment that required her to learn a new programming
language, training to deal with difficult people would not help her much. However, the
training was very timely for her new consulting position. Many organizations provide
e-learning opportunities for their employees so they can learn specific skills at any time
and any place. They have also found that e-learning is sometimes more cost-effective than
traditional instructor-led training courses. It is important to make sure that the timing
and delivery method for the training is appropriate for specific situations and individuals.
Organizations have also found that it is often more economical to train current employees
in particular areas than it is to hire new people who already possess those skills.
Several organizations that have successfully implemented Six Sigma principles have
taken a unique and effective approach to training. They only let high-potential employees
attend Six Sigma Black Belt training, which is a substantial investment of time and
money. In addition, they do not let employees into a particular Black Belt course until the
employees have had a potential Six Sigma project approved that relates to their current
job. Attendees can then apply the new concepts and techniques they learn in the classes
to their jobs. High-potential employees feel rewarded by being picked to take this training,
and the organization benefits by having these employees implement high-payoff projects
because of the training.
Team-Building Activities
Many organizations provide in-house team-building training activities, and many also
use services provided by external companies that specialize in this area. It is important
to understand individual needs, including learning styles, past training, and physical
limitations, when determining team-building training options. Two common approaches to
team-building activities are physical challenges and psychological preference indicator tools.
Several organizations have teams go through physically challenging activities to help
them develop as a team. Military basic training or boot camps provide one example. Men
and women who want to join the military must first finish basic training, which often
involves strenuous physical activities such as rappelling off towers, running and marching
in full military gear, going through obstacle courses, passing marksmanship training,
and mastering survival training. Many organizations use a similar approach by sending
teams to special locations where they work together to navigate white water rapids,
climb mountains or rocks, and participate in rope courses. Research shows that physical
challenges often help teams of strangers to work together more effectively, but it can cause
already dysfunctional teams to have even more problems.
Even more organizations have teams participate in mental team-building activities
in which they learn about themselves, each other, and how to work as a group most
effectively. It is important for people to understand and value each other's differences to
work effectively as a team. Three common exercises used in mental team building include
the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator, Wilson Learning Social Styles Profile, and the DISC Profile.
Project Resource Management
405
The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator
The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) is a popular tool for determining personality
preferences. During World War II, Isabel B. Myers and Katherine C. Briggs developed the
first version of the MBTI based on psychologist Carl Jung's theory of psychological type.
The four dimensions of psychological type in the MBTI include the following:

Extrovert/Introvert (E/I): This first dimension determines if you are generally
extroverted or introverted, which signifies whether you draw energy from
other people (extrovert) or from yourself (introvert).

Sensation/Intuition (S/N): This second dimension relates to the manner in
which you gather information. Sensation (or Sensing) type people take in
facts, details, and reality and describe themselves as practical. Intuitive type
people are imaginative, ingenious, and attentive to hunches or intuition.
They describe themselves as innovative and conceptual.

Thinking/Feeling (T/F): Thinking judgment is objective and logical, and
feeling judgment is subjective and personal.

Judgment/Perception (J/P): This fourth dimension concerns people's attitudes
toward structure. Judgment type people like closure and task completion.
They tend to establish deadlines and take them seriously, expecting others to
do the same. Perceiving types prefer to keep things open and flexible. They
regard deadlines more as a signal to start rather than complete a project and
do not feel that work must be done before play or rest begins.28
Much more than this simple sketch is involved in determining personality types,
and many books are available on this topic. In 1998, David Keirsey published Please
Understand Me II: Temperament, Character, Intelligence.29 This book includes a test
called the Keirsey Temperament Sorter, which is a personality type preference test based
on the work of Jung, Myers, and Briggs. The test is easy to take and interpret.
An interesting study of the MBTI types within the general population of the United
States and information systems (IS) developers revealed some significant contrasts.30
The two groups of people were most similar in the judgment/perception dimension,
with slightly more than half of each group preferring the judgment type (J). There were
significant differences, however, in the other three dimensions. Most people would not be
surprised to learn that most IS developers are introverts. This study found that 75 percent
of IS developers were introverts, and only 25 percent of the general population were
introverts. This personality type difference might help explain some of the problems
users have communicating with developers. Another sharp contrast found in the study
was that almost 80 percent of IS developers were thinking types compared to 50 percent
of the general population. IS developers were also much more likely to be intuitive
(about 55 percent) than the general population (about 25 percent). These results fit with
Keirsey's classification of NT (Intuitive/Thinking types) people as rationals. Educationally,
they tend to study the sciences, enjoy technology as a hobby, and pursue systems work.
Keirsey also suggests that no more than 7 percent of the general population are NTs.
Would you be surprised to know that Bill Gates is classified as a rational?31
Project managers can often benefit from knowing their team members' MBTI profiles
by adjusting their management styles for each person. For example, if the project manager
Chapter 9
406
is a strong N and one of the team members is a strong S, the project manager should
provide more concrete, detailed explanations for that person's task assignments. Project
managers may also want to make sure they have a variety of personality types on their
teams. For example, if all team members are strong introverts, it may be difficult for them
to work well with users and other important stakeholders who are extroverts.
Like any test, you should use the MBTI with caution. Several studies argue that
the lack of progress in improving software development teams and other teams is due
in part to the inappropriate use of psychological tests and basic misunderstandings of
personality theory. "Software engineers often complain about those who, in the course
of their work, do some programming in support of their professional activities: the claim
being that such individuals are not professionals and do not understand the discipline.
The same can be said of those who adopt psychological approaches without the relevant
qualifications and background."32
The Social Styles Profile
Many organizations also use the Social Styles Profile in team-building activities.
Psychologist David Merril, who helped develop the Wilson Learning Social Styles Profile,
describes people as falling into four approximate behavioral profiles, or zones, based on
their assertiveness and responsiveness:

Drivers are proactive and task-oriented. They are firmly rooted in the
present, and they strive for action. Adjectives to describe drivers include
pushy, severe, tough, dominating, harsh, strong-willed, independent,
practical, decisive, and efficient.

Expressives are proactive and people-oriented. They are future-oriented
and use their intuition to look for fresh perspectives on the world around
them. Adjectives to describe expressives include manipulating, excitable,
undisciplined, reacting, egotistical, ambitious, stimulating, wacky,
enthusiastic, dramatic, and friendly.

Analyticals are reactive and task-oriented. They are past-oriented and strong
thinkers. Adjectives to describe analyticals include critical, indecisive, stuffy,
picky, moralistic, industrious, persistent, serious, expecting, and orderly.

Amiables are reactive and people-oriented. They think in terms of the
present, past, or future depending on the situation, and they strongly value
relationships. Adjectives to describe amiables include conforming, unsure,
ingratiating, dependent, awkward, supportive, respectful, willing, dependable,
and agreeable.33
Figure 9-9 shows these four social styles and their two main determinants:
assertiveness and responsiveness. To determine your level of assertiveness, ask if you are
more likely to tell people what to do or ask them what should be done. To determine your
responsiveness to tasks, ask whether you focus on the task itself or on the people involved
in performing the task.
Knowing the social styles of project stakeholders can help project managers
understand why certain people may have problems working together. For example, drivers
are often very impatient working with amiables, and analyticals often have difficulties
understanding expressives.
Project Resource Management
407
DISC Profile
Similar to the Social Styles Profile, the DISC Profile uses a four-dimensional model
of normal behavior. The four dimensions-Dominance, Influence, Steadiness, and
Compliance-provide the basis for the name DISC. Note that other, similar, terms
are sometimes used for some of these letters, such as stability for steadiness or
conscientiousness for compliance. The DISC Profile is based on the 1928 work of
psychologist William Moulton Marston. The DISC Profile reveals people's behavioral
tendencies under certain situations. For example, it reveals how you tend to behave
under stress, in conflict, when communicating, and when avoiding certain activities.
According to www.onlinediscprofile.com, "over 5 million people have taken various
forms of the DISC Profile throughout the world. Marston's original work continues to
be enhanced by ongoing behavioral research and profiles can be found in more than
50 languages by various publishers of the disc assessment."34
Figure 9-10 shows the four dimensions of the DISC Profile model and describes key
characteristics of each dimension. Notice that each dimension is also associated with a
color and emphasis, such as I, We, You, or It:

Dominance: Represented by red and emphasizing "I," dominance traits
include being direct, decisive, assertive, outcome-oriented, competitive, self-
assured, controlling, and wanting to win.

Influence: Represented by yellow and emphasizing "We," influence traits
include being persuasive, optimistic, outgoing, verbal, enthusiastic, striving
to win others over, and practicing leadership through acclimation.

Steadiness: Represented by green and emphasizing "You," steadiness traits
include being calm, sincere, cautious, conflict averse, a good listener, and
wanting to maintain stability.
Figure 9-9  Social styles
Ask-Directed Assertiveness
People-Directed Responsiveness
Task-Directed Responsiveness
Tell-Directed Assertiveness
Analytical
Driver
Amiable
Expressive
Chapter 9
408

Compliance: Represented by blue and emphasizing "It," compliance traits
include being data driven, risk averse, concerned, working well alone, preferring
processes and procedures, and not being very communicative or social.
Like the Social Styles Profile, people in opposite quadrants, such as Dominance and
Steadiness or Influence and Compliance, can have problems understanding each other.
Many other team-building activities and tests are available. For example, some people
take Dr. Meredith Belbin's test to help determine which of nine team roles they might
prefer. Again, professionals should use any team-building or personality tool with caution.
In reality, most professionals must be flexible and do whatever is needed for their teams to
succeed. Project managers can use their leadership and coaching skills to help all types of
people communicate better with each other and focus on meeting project goals.
Reward and Recognition Systems
Another important tool for promoting team development is the use of team-based
reward and recognition systems. If management rewards teamwork, they will promote or
reinforce the philosophy that people work more effectively in teams. Some organizations
offer bonuses, trips, or other rewards to workers who meet or exceed company or project
goals. In a project setting, project managers can recognize and reward people who
willingly work overtime to meet an aggressive schedule objective or go out of their way to
help a teammate. Project managers should not reward people who work overtime just to
get extra pay or because of their own poor work or planning.
Project managers must continually assess their team's performance. When they find
areas in which individuals or the entire team can improve, it's their job to find the best
way to develop their people and improve performance.
Figure 9-10  The DISC profile
Dominance (Red)
Direct, decisive, assertive,
outcome oriented, competitive,
self assured, takes control, has
to win
I
Inﬂuence (Yellow)
Persuasive, optimistic,
outgoing, verbal, enthusiastic,
strives to win others over,
leadership through acclimation
We
Compliance (Blue)
Data driven, risk averse,
concerned, works well alone,
prefers processes and procedures,
not very communicative or social
It
Steadiness (Green)
Calm, sincere, sympathetic,
cooperative, cautious, conﬂict
averse, good listener, wants to
maintain stability
You
Project Resource Management
409
Managing the Project Team
In addition to developing the project team, the project manager must lead it in performing
various project activities. (Note that PMI uses the word managing the project team versus
leading, so that wording is used here as well.) After assessing team performance and
related information, the project manager must decide if changes should be requested to
the project, or if updates are needed to enterprise environmental factors, organizational
process assets, or the project management plan. Project managers must use their soft
skills to find the best way to motivate and manage each team member.
Tools and Techniques for Managing Project Teams
Several tools and techniques are available to assist in managing project teams, including
interpersonal and team skills (i.e. conflict management, decision making, emotional intel-
ligence, influencing, and leadership) and project management information systems. Conflict
management is discussed further below, while other topics have already been addressed.
Few projects are completed without conflicts. Some types of conflict are actually
desirable on projects, but many are not. It's important for project managers to understand
strategies for handling conflicts and to proactively manage conflict.
Blake and Mouton (1964) delineated five basic modes or strategies for handling
conflicts in their popular managerial grid. Each strategy has high, medium, or low
importance on two levels: importance of the task or goal (or concern for production), and
importance of the relationship between the conflicting parties (concern for people). These
modes are shown in Figure 9-11.
Forcing/
Directing
Compromise/
Reconcile
Smoothing/
Accommodating
Confrontation/
Problem-solving
Collaborating
Withdrawal/
Avoidance
High
Medium
Low
Low
Medium
High
Task Importance
Relationship Importance
Figure 9-11  Conflict handling modes
Source: Kathy Schwalbe, An Introduction to Project Management, Sixth ­Edition
(September 2017)
Chapter 9
410
1. Confrontation: When using the confrontation mode, project managers face
a conflict directly using a problem-solving approach that allows affected
parties to work through their disagreements. This approach is also called
the problem-solving mode or win/win using Covey's terminology. When the
task and relationship are both of high importance, this mode is usually the
most effective.
2.
Compromise: With the compromise mode, project managers use a give-and-take
approach to resolving conflicts. They bargain and search for solutions that bring
some degree of satisfaction to all the parties in a dispute. Some people refer to it
as reconciliation. This mode works best when both the task and the relationship
are of medium importance.
3. Smoothing: When using the smoothing mode, the project manager
deemphasizes or avoids areas of differences and emphasizes areas of
agreement. This approach is also called accommodating, and it is best
used when the relationship is of high importance and the task is of low
importance.
4. Forcing: The forcing mode can be viewed as the win/lose approach to
conflict resolution. Project managers exert their viewpoint at the potential
expense of another viewpoint. Some people refer to it as directing. If the task
is of high importance and the relationship is of low importance, this mode
can be very effective.
5. Withdrawal: When using the withdrawal mode, project managers
retreat or withdraw from an actual or potential disagreement. This
approach is also called avoiding, and is normally the least desirable
conflict-handling mode, unless the task and the relationship are both of
low importance.
More recent studies recognize a sixth conflict-handling mode:
6. Collaborating: Using the collaborating mode, decision makers incorporate
different viewpoints and insights to develop consensus and commitment.
Even though managers might not agree on a decision, they commit to
following it in the best interests of the organization.
Project managers must also realize that not all conflict is bad. Conflict often
produces important results, such as new ideas, better alternatives, and motivation to
work harder and more collaboratively. Project team members may become stagnant
or develop groupthink-conformance to the values or ethical standards of a group-
if there are no conflicting viewpoints on various aspects of a project. Research by
Karen Jehn, Professor of Management at the University of Melbourne, suggests that
task-related conflict, which is derived from differences over team objectives and how
to achieve them, often improves team performance. Emotional conflict, however,
stems from personality clashes and misunderstandings, and often depresses team
performance. Project managers should create an environment that encourages and
maintains the positive and productive aspects of conflict.35
Project Resource Management
411
General Advice on Managing Teams
According to Patrick Lencioni, a well-known author and consultant on teams, "Teamwork
remains the one sustainable competitive advantage that has been largely untapped . . .
teamwork is almost always lacking within organizations that fail, and often present within
those that succeed."36 However, teamwork is challenging to create, and because teams are
subject to dysfunction, maintaining teamwork is equally challenging. The five dysfunctions of
teams are as follows:
1. Absence of trust
2. Fear of conflict
3. Lack of commitment
4. Avoidance of accountability
5. Inattention to results
Lencioni's books provide suggestions for overcoming each of these dysfunctions.
For example, he suggests that team members take the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator,
as described earlier in this chapter, to help people open up to each other and build
trust. To master conflict, he suggests that teams practice having unfiltered, passionate
debates about important issues. To achieve commitment, he stresses the importance
of expressing all possible ideas and getting people to agree to disagree, but then having
them commit to decisions. To embrace accountability, Lencioni emphasizes the
importance of clarifying and focusing on everyone's top priorities. He also suggests that
peer pressure and the distaste for letting down a colleague are often better motivators
than authoritative intervention. Finally, using some type of scoreboard to focus on team
results helps eliminate ambiguity so everyone knows what it means to achieve positive
results.
Additional suggestions for ensuring that teams are productive include the following:

Be patient and kind with your team. Assume the best about people; do not
assume that your team members are lazy and careless.

Fix the problem instead of blaming people. Help people work out problems by
focusing on behaviors.

Establish regular, effective meetings. Focus on meeting project objectives and
producing positive results.

Allow time for teams to go through Tuckman's basic team-building stages of
forming, storming, norming, performing, and adjourning. Don't expect teams
to work at the highest performance level right away.

Limit the size of work teams to three to seven members.

Plan some social activities to help project team members and other stakeholders
get to know each other better. Make the social events fun and not mandatory.

Stress team identity. Create traditions that team members enjoy.

Nurture team members and encourage them to help each other. Identify and
provide training that will help individuals and the team as a whole become
more effective.

Acknowledge individual and group accomplishments.
Chapter 9
412

Take additional actions to work with virtual team members. If possible,
have a face-to-face or phone meeting at the start of a virtual project or when
introducing a virtual team member. Screen people carefully to make sure
they can work effectively in a virtual environment. Clarify how virtual team
members will communicate.
As you can imagine, team development, leadership, and management are critical
concerns on many IT projects. To paraphrase Keirsey, many IT project managers must
break out of their rational/NT preference and focus on empathically listening to other
people to address their concerns and create an environment in which individuals and
teams can grow and prosper.
Controlling Resources
Controlling resources involves ensuring that the physical resources assigned to the project
are available as planned. It also involves monitoring the planned versus actual resources
utilization and taking corrective actions as needed. Making effective use of team members
is addressed under the Manage Team process. Tools and techniques include data analysis,
problem solving, interpersonal and team skills, and project management information
systems. Key outputs include work performance information, change requests, project
management plan updates, and project documents updates.
Using Software to Assist in Resource Management
Earlier in this chapter, you read that a simple responsibility assignment matrix or
resource histograms are useful tools that can help you effectively manage resources
on projects. You can use several different software packages, including spreadsheets or
project management software such as Microsoft Project 2016, to create matrixes and
histograms. Many people do not realize that Project 2016 provides a variety of resource
management tools, some of which include assigning and tracking resources, resource
leveling, resource usage reports, overallocated resource reports, and to-do lists. You can
learn how to use many of these functions and features in Appendix A (available on the
Companion website for this text).
You can use Project 2016 to assign resources such as equipment, materials, facilities,
and people to tasks. It enables you to allocate individual resources to individual projects
or to pool resources and share them across multiple projects. By defining and assigning
resources in Project 2016, you can

keep track of resources through stored information and reports on resource
assignments;

identify potential resource shortages that could cause a project to miss
scheduled deadlines and possibly extend the duration of a project;

identify underutilized resources and reassign them, which may enable you to
shorten a project's schedule and reduce costs; and

use automated leveling to make level resources easier to manage.
Project Resource Management
413
Considerations for Agile/Adaptive Environments
The PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition provides the following information for project
resource management:
Projects with high variability benefit from team structures that maximize focus and
collaboration, such as self-organizing teams with generalizing specialists.
Collaboration is intended to boost productivity and facilitate innovative problem
solving. Collaborative teams may facilitate accelerated integration of distinct work
activities, improve communication, increase knowledge sharing, and provide
flexibility of work assignments in addition to other advantages.
Although the benefits of collaboration also apply to other project environments,
collaborative teams are often critical to the success of projects with a high degree of
variability and rapid changes, because there is less time for centralized tasking and
decision making.
Planning for physical and human resources is much less predictable in projects with
high variability. In these environments, agreements for fast supply and lean methods
are critical to controlling costs and achieving the schedule.37
Teams are important on all types of projects, as is collaboration, problem solving, and
knowledge sharing. On agile projects, however, team members are usually fully dedicated
to a single team. Relationships are based on trust, and collaboration is continuously
improved using regular feedback loops. Each delivery of usable product at the end of a
sprint, for example, reduces uncertainty and builds team confidence. Another difference
with agile teams is that some do not use project managers. They might be self-directing
teams, or they might use a Scrum master.
Daily stand-up meetings are designed to increase the frequency of interaction among
project team members, while making these frequent meetings as short as possible and
focused on the topic at hand. The co-location of users with development teams is an
important form of social needs satisfaction. Communication between the development team
and user group is likely to be too little and needs to be encouraged by co-location.
In addition to human resources, physical resources should be managed in an adaptive
way. Prototypes, simulations, feasibility studies, and other means of reducing risk are
ways to determine what resources work for the given purpose and how best to use them.
This approach requires organizing the work into chunks of work that can be identified
with specific resources and costs and implementing them in an order that makes sense as
the deliverables take shape within the overall project.
Project resource management involves much more than using software to assess and
track resource loading and to level resources. People are the most important asset on
most projects, and human resources are very different from other resources. You can-
not simply replace people in the same way that you replace a piece of equipment. It is
essential to treat people with consideration and respect, to understand what motivates
them, and to communicate carefully with them. What makes good project managers
great is not their use of tools, but their ability to enable project team members to deliver
their best work on a project.
Chapter 9
414
C a s e W r a p - U p
After Sarah yelled back at Ben, he said, "You're the first person who's had the guts
to stand up to me." After that brief introduction, Sarah, Ben, and the other meeting
participants had a good discussion about what was happening on the F-44 upgrade
project. Sarah was able to write a justification to get Ben's group special software and
support to download key information from the old system so they could manage their
project better. When Sarah stood nose to nose with Ben and yelled at him, she used a
technique for establishing rapport called mirroring. Although Sarah was not a loud and
obnoxious person, she saw that Ben was and decided to mirror his behavior and attitude.
She put herself in his shoes for a while, which helped break the ice so Sarah, Ben, and
the other people at the meeting could start communicating and working together as a
team to solve their problems.
Project Resource Management
415
Chapter Summary
People are the most important assets in organizations and on projects. Therefore, it is essential
for project managers to be good human resource managers. They must also make effective use
of physical resources.
The major processes of project resource management include planning resources,
estimating activity resources, acquiring resources, developing the team, managing the team,
and controlling resources.
Psychosocial issues that affect how people work and how well they work include motivation,
influence and power, and effectiveness.
Maslow developed a hierarchy of needs that suggests physiological, safety, social, esteem,
and self-actualization needs motivate behavior. Once a need is satisfied, it no longer serves as a
motivator.
Herzberg distinguished between motivators and hygiene factors. Hygiene factors such as
larger salaries or a more attractive work environment will cause dissatisfaction if not present,
but do not motivate workers to do more if present. Achievement, recognition, the work itself,
responsibility, and growth are factors that contribute to work satisfaction and motivating workers.
McClelland proposed the acquired-needs theory, suggesting that a person's needs are
acquired or learned over time and shaped by their life experiences. The three types of acquired
needs are a need for achievement, a need for affiliation, and a need for power.
McGregor developed Theory X and Theory Y to describe different approaches to managing
workers, based on assumptions of worker motivation. Research supports the use of Theory Y,
which assumes that people see work as natural and indicates that the most significant rewards
are the satisfaction of esteem and self-actualization needs that work can provide. According
to Ouchi's Theory Z, workers can be trusted to do their jobs to their utmost ability as long as
management supports them and looks out for their well-being. Theory Z emphasizes job rotation,
broadening of skills, generalization versus specialization, and the need for continuous training of
workers.
Thamhain and Wilemon identified nine influence bases available to project managers:
authority, assignment, budget, promotion, money, penalty, work challenge, expertise, and
friendship. Their research found that project success is associated with project managers who
use work challenge and expertise to influence workers. Project failure is associated with placing
too much emphasis on authority, money, or penalty.
Power is the ability to influence behavior to get people to do things they would not otherwise
do. The five main types of power are coercive power, legitimate power, expert power, reward
power, and referent power.
Project managers can use Stephen Covey's seven habits of highly effective people to
help themselves and project teams become more effective. The seven habits include being
proactive; beginning with the end in mind; putting first things first; thinking win/win; seeking first to
understand, then to be understood; achieving synergy; and sharpening the saw. Using empathic
listening is a key skill of good project managers.
Emotional intelligence is also an important concept. It involves knowing and managing one's
own emotions and those of others for improved performance.
Chapter 9
416
Project managers must also develop leadership skills. The best leaders understand and
apply different leadership styles appropriate to the situation at hand.
Developing the resource management plan includes identifying physical resources as
well as identifying, assigning, and documenting project roles, responsibilities, and reporting
relationships. A responsibility assignment matrix (RAM), staffing management plans, resource
histograms, and RACI charts are key tools for defining roles and responsibilities on projects. The
main outputs include a resource management plan and a team charter.
Estimating activity resources involves estimating the number of physical and human
resources needed to complete the project.
Acquiring resources means assigning the appropriate physical resources and staff to work
on the project. This is an important issue in today's competitive environment. Companies must
use innovative approaches to find and retain good IT staff.
Resource loading shows the amount of individual resources that an existing schedule
requires during specific time frames. Histograms show resource loading and identify
overallocation of resources.
Resource leveling is a technique for resolving resource conflicts, such as overallocated
resources, by delaying tasks. Leveled resources require less management, lower costs, produce
fewer personnel and accounting problems, and often improve morale.
Two crucial skills of a good project manager are team development and team management.
Teamwork helps people work more effectively to achieve project goals. Project managers can
recommend individual training to improve skills related to teamwork, organize team-building
activities for the entire project team and key stakeholders, and provide reward and recognition
systems that encourage teamwork. Project managers can use several tools and techniques,
including conflict management, to effectively manage their teams. There are several conflict-
handling modes, and they can be viewed based on two dimensions: task importance and
relationship importance.
Controlling resources involves ensuring that the physical resources assigned to the project
are available as planned and monitoring the planned versus actual resources utilization, taking
corrective actions as needed.
Spreadsheets and project management software such as Microsoft Project 2016 can help
project managers in project resource management. Software makes it easy to produce responsibility
assignment matrixes, create resource histograms, identify overallocated resources, level resources,
and provide various views and reports related to project resource management.
Project resource management involves much more than using software to facilitate
organizational planning and assign resources. What makes good project managers great is their
ability to enable project team members to deliver their best work on a project.
Be sure to consider how resource management can differ in agile/adaptive environments.
Discussion Questions
1. Discuss changes in the job market for IT workers. How do the job market and current state
of the economy affect human resource management?
2. Summarize the processes involved in project resource management.
Project Resource Management
417
3. Briefly summarize the works of Maslow, Herzberg, McClelland, McGregor, Ouchi, Thamhain
and Wilemon, and Covey. How do their theories relate to project management?
4. What is emotional intelligence (EI)? Why is it important to develop EI skills?
5. Describe a situation where it would be appropriate to use each of the six leadership styles
described by Daniel Goleman.
6. Describe situations in which it would be appropriate to create a project organizational chart,
a responsibility assignment matrix, a RACI chart, and a resource histogram. Describe what
these charts or matrices look like.
7. Discuss the difference between resource loading and resource leveling, and provide an
example of when you would use each technique.
8. Explain two types of team-building activities described in this chapter and discuss their
advantages and disadvantages.
9. Summarize the different ways that project managers can address conflicts to help them
manage project teams. What can they do to manage virtual team members successfully?
10. How can you use project management software to assist in project resource management?
Quick Quiz
1. Which of the following is not part of project resource management?
a.
Duration estimating
b.
Acquiring resources
c.
Developing the project team
d.
Managing the project team
2.
causes people to participate in an activity for their own enjoyment.
a.
Intrinsic motivation
b.
Extrinsic motivation
c.
Self-motivation
d.
Social motivation
3. At the bottom of Maslow's pyramid or hierarchy of needs are
needs.
a.
self-actualization
b.
esteem
c.
safety
d.
physiological
4. According to McClelland's acquired-needs theory, people who desire harmonious relations
with other people and need to feel accepted have a high
need.
a.
social
b.
achievement
c.
affiliation
d.
extrinsic
Chapter 9
418
5.
power is based on a person's individual charisma.
a.
Affiliation
b.
Referent
c.
Personality
d.
Legitimate
6. A
maps the work of a project, as described in the WBS, to the people
responsible for performing the work.
a.
project organizational chart
b.
work definition and assignment process
c.
resource histogram
d.
responsibility assignment matrix
7. A staffing management plan often includes a resource
, which is a column
chart that shows the number of resources assigned to the project over time.
a.
chart
b.
graph
c.
histogram
d.
timeline
8. What technique can you use to resolve resource conflicts by delaying tasks?
a.
Resource loading
b.
Resource leveling
c.
Critical path analysis
d.
Overallocation
9. What are the five stages in Tuckman's model of team development, in chronological
order?
a.
Forming, storming, norming, performing, and adjourning
b.
Storming, forming, norming, performing, and adjourning
c.
Norming, forming, storming, performing, and adjourning
d.
Forming, storming, performing, norming, and adjourning
10. Which method for conflict management should be used when both the task and the
relationship are of high importance?
a.
Compromise
b.
Confrontation
c.
Collaboration
d.
Smoothing
Quick Quiz Answers
1. a; 2. a; 3. d; 4. c; 5. b; 6. d; 7. c; 8. b; 9. a; 10. b
Project Resource Management
419
Exercises
1. Watch a video about a famous company, such as Google, Apple, or Walmart, that focuses
on its treatment of workers and customers. (Netflix has several videos about companies,
and you can find several documentaries on the Internet or through your school's library.)
How do these organizations manage their human resources? How do they treat customers
and suppliers? Do they treat people differently in different parts of the world or in different
positions? What perks do they provide? Which perks would be most important to you, and
why? Summarize your findings and opinions in a one- or two-page paper, and cite the
references you use.
2. Research recent books, articles, and videos on motivation, including work by Daniel Pink.
Also interview two or more people who have worked for an IT department in the past, or
are doing so now, and ask them to give you all the approaches, besides money, that can
motivate people at work. (He has a popular YouTube video created by RSA Animate.) Do
you think there are any new insights in the information you found? Are managers trying to
focus on what really motivates people to do project work better? Summarize your findings
and opinions in a one- or two-page paper, and cite the references you use.
3. Your company is planning to launch an important new project that starts on January 1 and
lasts one year. You estimate that you will need one full-time project manager, two full-time
business analysts for the first six months, two full-time senior programmers for the whole
year, four full-time junior programmers for the months of July, August, and September, and
one full-time technical writer for the last three months. Use the resource_histogram template
file from the Companion website to create a stacked column chart showing a resource
histogram for this project, similar to the example in Figure 9-6. Be sure to include a legend to
label the types of resources needed. Use appropriate titles and axis labels.
4. Take the MBTI test and research information about this tool. Several websites have different
versions of the test, including www.humanmetrics.com, www.personalitytype.com, and
www.keirsey.com. Write a short paper describing your MBTI type and your thoughts on
this test as a team-building tool. If you are working on a team project, compare your results
and discuss how they might affect team dynamics. In addition, research tools on self-
actualization and discuss this topic with your team.
5. Summarize three of Covey's habits in your own words and give examples of how these
habits would apply to project management. Document your ideas in a short paper, and
include at least two references.
6. Research different tools for assessing leadership styles. Summarize at least three tools and
the styles they mention. Do you believe that it's best for leaders to use different styles in
different situations? Why or why not?
7. Research recruiting and retention strategies at three different companies. Make sure that
the strategies use contrasting approaches. For example, find out how Google treats its
workers, and compare the approach with that of Foxconn or another company in the news.
What distinguishes one company from another in this area? Are strategies such as signing
bonuses, tuition reimbursement, and business casual dress codes standard for new IT
workers? What strategies appeal most to you? Summarize your ideas in a short paper that
cites at least three references.
Chapter 9
420
8. Write a short paper summarizing the main features of Microsoft Project 2016 that can assist
project managers in human resource management. In addition, interview someone who uses
Project 2016. Ask if his or her organization uses any of the project resource management
features described in this chapter and Appendix A (available on the Companion website for
this text), and document the reasons given for using or not using certain features.
9. Developing good IT project managers is an important issue. Review several of the studies
cited in this chapter that are related to the IT and project management job markets and
required skills for these markets. Also review requirements at your college or university
for people entering these fields. Summarize your findings and opinions on this issue in a
short paper.
Running Case
Several people working on the Global Treps Project are confused about their responsibilities for
providing content for the new website. Recall that the team members include you, the project
manager, Bobby, the IT guy, and three people who will run shark-tank-like events in Vietnam,
India, and Ethiopia (Kim, Ashok, and Alfreda). Recall that the activities in the WBS for the
in-house development include the following:
1.3.2.1 Guidelines and templates for events
1.3.2.2 Acceptance of ideas for needed new products or services
1.3.2.3 Custom site for 20 events
You and your team also need to provide information for the videos that you are outsourcing.
Recall that the purpose of these short videos is to show people how to use the site and provide
suggestions for holding the events. That activity is 1.3.1.3 Video creation for website in the
WBS. You have selected the company that will do the outsourced video creation, and their main
contact person is Angela.
1. Prepare a RACI chart for the four WBS activities listed. You decide that one person should
be accountable for each of these four activities, spreading the work between you, Kim,
Ashok, and Alfreda. Bobby will be informed on each activity, and you will be consulted on
the ones you are not accountable for. Document key assumptions you make in preparing
the chart.
2. You realize that all of your team members have different personality types, and you believe
you could work better as a team if you understood each other better. You asked everyone
to take an MBTI-based assessment (a free one you found at www.humanmetrics.com).
You are an ENTJ, Bobby is an INTJ, Kim is an ISFP, Ashok is an ESTJ, and Alfreda is an
ISFJ. Find information about each of these MBTI types and summarize their traits as well as
suggestions for improving teamwork.
3. Angela, the person in charge of the company preparing the short videos for you website,
has suggested that you work together to prepare a detailed list of resources available to
help prepare scripts and edit the videos they will create. You decide to use animations
instead of real people in the videos, and Angela's company has a lot of experience in that
area. Together, you decide that you will need someone to take on the roles of script writers,
Project Resource Management
421
script editors, animators, sound experts, content editors, and technical editors. Angela and
her team will do all of the animating, sound, and technical work and will provide guidance
for you and your team to do the other work. To keep costs down and stay on schedule, you
decide to plan for all of the video work to be done in 20 days, using no more than 240 total
hours of effort, with about half of the effort from Angela's company. Prepare a resource
histogram to estimate the number of hours by role for each of the 20 days. Document key
assumptions you make in preparing the histogram.
Key Terms
coercive power
collaborating mode
compromise mode
confrontation mode
deputy project managers
emotional intelligence
empathic listening
expert power
extrinsic motivation
forcing mode
groupthink
hierarchy of needs
intrinsic motivation
legitimate power
mirroring
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI)
organizational breakdown structure (OBS)
overallocation
power
RACI charts
rapport
referent power
resource breakdown structure
resource histogram
resource leveling
resource loading
responsibility assignment matrix (RAM)
reward power
smoothing mode
staffing management plan
subproject managers
synergy
team charter
team development
Tuckman model
withdrawal mode
Endnotes

1 International Telecommunication Union, "ICT Facts and Figures (2017).

2 Business Wire, "Annual ICT Spending to Reach $5.5 Trillion by 2020, According to New 3rd
Platform Edition of IDC Black Book," (June 20, 2017).

3 Forbes Technology Council, "13 Top Tech Skills in High Demand For 2018," Forbes (Dec. 21,
2017).

4 Mary K. Pratt, "10 hottest tech skills for 2017," Computerworld (Dec. 7, 2016).
Chapter 9
422

5 Ibid.

6 Project Management Institute, "Project Management Jobs Growth and Talent Gap Report
2017-2027" (2018).

7 Fortune, "100 Best Companies to Work For, 2015," Fortune (January 30, 2015), fortune.com/
best-companies/.

8 Emily Peck, "Proof That Working from Home Is Here to Stay: Even Yahoo Still Does It,"
The Huffington Post (March 18, 2015).

9 CompTIA, "State of the IT Skills Gap," CompTIA (2014), www.comptia.org/resources/
state-of-the-it-skills-gap-2014.

10 Frederick Herzberg, "One More Time: How Do You Motivate Employees?" Harvard Business
Review (February 1968), pp. 51-62.

11 RSA Animate, "Drive: The Surprising Truth about What Motivates Us," YouTube video, 10:48,
from a talk given by Dan Pink at RSA: 21st Century Enlightenment on February 27, 2013,
uploaded April 1, 2010 by RSA, www.youtube.com/watch?v=u6XAPnuFjJc.

12 David C. McClelland, The Achieving Society (New York: Free Press, 1961).

13 Douglas McGregor, The Human Side of Enterprise (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1960).

14 William Ouchi, Theory Z: How American Business Can Meet the Japanese Challenge
(New York: Avon Books, 1981).

15 H. J. Thamhain and D. L. Wilemon, "Building Effective Teams for Complex Project
Environments," Technology Management 5, no. 2 (May 1999).

16 Hans J. Thamhain, "Changing Dynamics of Team Leadership in Global Project
Environments," American Journal of Industrial and Business Management, 3 (2013),
pp. 146-156, dx.doi.org/10.4236/ajibm.2013.32020 (published online April 2013).

17 John R. French and Bertram H. Raven, "The Bases of Social Power," in Studies in Social
Power, D. Cartwright (Ed.) (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1959).

18 Stephen Covey, The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People: Powerful Lessons in Personal
Change (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1990).

19 Tracy Kidder, The Soul of a New Machine (New York: Modern Library, 1997).

20 Douglas Ross, "Applying Covey's Seven Habits to a Project Management Career," PM
Network (April 1996), pp. 26-30.

21 MindTools Content Team, "Empathy at Work," https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/
EmpathyatWork.htm (accessed January 23, 2018).
22 PMI, "Must-Have Career Skill: Emotional Intelligence" (October 18, 2011).

23 Peter Northouse, Leadership: Theory and Practice, Seventh Edition (Thousand Oaks, CA:
SAGE Publications, Inc., 2015), p. 5.

24 Bendelta, "Goleman's 6 Leadership Styles-and When to Use Them" (December 9, 2014).

25 PMI, "Pulse of the Profession In-Depth Report: Navigating Complexity" (2013).

26 Great Place To Work, "2015 Fortune 100 Best Companies to Work For  List" (2015),
www.reviews.greatplacetowork.com/homepage/2-site/1164-2015-fortune-100-best-
companies-to-work-for-list.
Project Resource Management
423

27 Bruce Tuckman and Mary Ann Jensen, "Stages of Small-Group Development Revisited,"
Group Organization Management, 2 (1977), pp. 419-427.

28 Isabel Myers Briggs, with Peter Myers, Gifts Differing: Understanding Personality Type
(Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press, 1995).

29 David Keirsey, Please Understand Me II: Temperament, Character, Intelligence (Del Mar,
CA: Prometheus Nemesis Book Company, 1998).

30 Michael L. Lyons, "The DP Psyche," Datamation (August 15, 1985).

31 The information provided about the Keirsey Temperament Sorter and Keirsey Temperament
Theory was compiled from keirsey.com.

32 Sharon McDonald and Helen M. Edwards, "Who Should Test Whom? Examining the Use
and Abuse of Personality Tests in Software Engineering," Communications of the ACM 50,
no. 1 (January 2007).

33 Harvey A. Robbins and Michael Finley, The New Why Teams Don't Work: What Goes Wrong
and How to Make It Right (San Francisco, CA: Berrett-Koehler Publishers, 1999).

34 John C. Goodman, "DISC, What Is It? Who Created the DISC Model?"
www.onlinediscprofile.com (2004-2008).

35 "Constructive Team Conflict," Wharton Leadership Digest 1, no. 6 (March 1997).

36 Patrick Lencioni, Overcoming the Five Dysfunctions of a Team: A Field Guide for Leaders,
Managers, and Facilitators (San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2005), p. 3.

37 Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of
Knowledge (PMBOK Guide) - Sixth Edition (2017), pp. 311-312.

* Sections with an asterisk are taken from Kathy Schwalbe, An Introduction to Project
Management, Sixth Edition, Schwalbe Publishing (2017).

C h a p t e r 10
Project Communications
Management
L e a r n i n g O b j e c t i v e s
After reading this chapter, you will be able to:

Discuss the role of soft skills in IT project management, and highlight the
importance of good communications as one means of achieving project
success

Review key concepts related to communications

Explain the elements of planning project communications and how to
create a communications management plan

Describe how to manage communications, including communication
technologies, media, and performance reporting

Discuss methods for controlling communications to ensure that
information needs are met throughout the life of the project

List various methods for improving project communications, such as
running effective meetings, using various technologies effectively, and
using templates

Describe how software can enhance project communications
management

Discuss considerations for agile/adaptive environments
Chapter 10
426
The Importance Of Project Communications Management
Many experts agree that the greatest threat to the success of any project, especially IT
projects, is a failure to communicate. Many problems in other knowledge areas, such as
an unclear scope or unrealistic schedules, indicate problems with communication. It is
crucial for project managers and their teams to make good communication a priority,
especially with top management and other key stakeholders.
The IT field is constantly changing, and these changes come with a great deal of
technical jargon. When computer professionals communicate with people who aren't as
proficient with or knowledgeable about computers-a group that includes many business
professionals and senior managers-technical jargon can often complicate matters and
create confusion. Even though most people use computers today, the gap between users
and developers increases as technology advances. This gap in knowledge and experience
causes some of the communication problems between technical professionals and their
business colleagues. Of course, not every computer professional is a poor communicator,
but most people in any field can improve their communication skills.
In addition, many educational systems for IT graduates promote strong technical skills
over strong communication and social skills. Most IT-related degree programs have many
technical requirements, but few require courses in communications (speaking, writing,
O p e n i n g C a s e
Peter Gumpert worked his way up the corporate ladder in a large telecommunications
company. He was intelligent, competent, and a strong leader, but the company's
new fiber-optic undersea telecommunications program was much larger and more
complicated than anything he had previously worked on, let alone managed. This
program consisted of several distinct projects, and Peter was in charge of overseeing
them all. The changing marketplace for undersea telecommunications systems and the
large number of projects involved made communications and flexibility critical concerns
for Peter. For missing milestone and completion dates, his company would suffer
financial penalties ranging from thousands of dollars per day for smaller projects to more
than $250,000 per day for larger projects. Many projects depended on the success of
other projects, so Peter had to understand and actively manage those critical interfaces.
Peter held several informal and formal discussions with the project managers who
reported to him on the program. He worked with them and his project executive assistant,
Christine Braun, to develop a communications plan for the program. He was still unsure,
however, about the best way to distribute information and manage all of the inevitable
changes that would occur. He also wanted to develop consistent ways for project managers
to develop their plans and track performance without stifling their creativity and autonomy.
Christine suggested that they consider using some new communications technologies to keep
important project information up to date and synchronized. Although Peter knew a lot about
telecommunications and laying fiber-optic lines, he was not an expert in using information
technology (IT) to improve the communication process. In fact, that was part of the reason he
had asked Christine to be his assistant. Could they really develop a process for communicating
that would be flexible and easy to use? Time was of the essence, as more projects were being
added to the fiber-optic undersea telecommunications program every week.
Project Communications Management
427
listening), psychology, sociology, and the humanities. People often assume that learning
these soft skills is easy, but they are important skills, so people must learn and develop them.
Many studies have shown that IT professionals need these soft skills just as much or even
more than other skills. You cannot totally separate technical skills and soft skills when working
on IT projects. For projects to succeed, every project team member needs both types of skills,
and needs to develop them continuously through formal education and on-the-job training.
Studies continue to show a high demand for IT professionals and the importance
of good communication and business skills. According to an article in the International
Journal of Business and Social Science:

Organizations are looking for workers with the correct mix of technical, soft,
and business skills.

The most important non-technical skills are problem solving, team work,
listening, the ability to adapt to new technologies and languages, time
management, the ability to transfer knowledge to application, multitasking,
verbal communication, the ability to visualize and conceptualize, "be the
customer" mentality, interpersonal skills, understanding business culture,
inter-team communication, and give and receive constructive criticism.

"The need for these non-technical skills is so great that some IT companies
indicate that they will hire individuals with minimum technical skills so long
as they demonstrate solid soft and business skills."1
This chapter highlights keys to good communications, describes the processes of
project communications management, provides suggestions for improving communications,
and describes how software can assist in project communications management.
The goal of project communications management is to ensure timely and appropriate
generation, collection, dissemination, storage, and disposition of project information.
There are three main processes in project communications management:
1. Planning communications management involves determining the
information and communications needs of the stakeholders. Who needs what
information? When will they need it? How will the information be given to
them? The outputs of this process include a communications management
plan, project management plan updates, and project documents updates.
2. Managing communications involves creating, distributing, storing, retrieving,
and disposing of project communications based on the communications
management plan. The main outputs of this process are project
communications, project management plan updates, project documents
updates, and organizational process assets updates. Recall from Chapter 4
that organizational process assets include formal and informal plans, policies,
procedures, guidelines, information systems, financial systems, management
systems, lessons learned, and historical information. These assets help people
understand, follow, and improve business processes in an organization.
3. Monitoring communications involves ensuring that stakeholder
communication needs are met.
Figure 10-1 summarizes the inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of project
communications management.
Chapter 10
428
Keys to Good Communications
Project managers say they spend as much as 90 percent of their time communicating.
Just as it is difficult to understand people and their motivations, it is also difficult to
communicate with people effectively. Several important concepts can help, such as
focusing on individual and group communication needs, using formal and informal
methods for communicating, providing important information in an effective and
timely manner, setting the stage for communicating bad news, and understanding
communication channels.
Focusing on Group and Individual Communication Needs
Many top managers think they can just add more people to a project that is falling
behind schedule. Unfortunately, this approach often causes more setbacks because of the
increased complexity of communications. In his popular book The Mythical Man-Month,
Source: PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition. Project Management Institute, Inc. (2017). Copyright and
all rights reserved. Material from this publication has been reproduced with permission of PMI.
Figure 10-1  Project communications management overview
10.1 Plan Communications
Management
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Work performance data
.4 Enterprise environmental
factors
.5 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Project management
information system
.3 Data representation
.4 Interpersonal and team
skills
.5 Meetings
.3 Outputs
.1 Work performance
information
.2 Change requests
.3 Project management plan
updates
.4 Project documents updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Work performance reports
.4 Enterprise environmental
factors
.5 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Communication technology
.2 Communication methods
.3 Communication skills
.4 Project management
Information system
.5 Project reporting
.6 Interpersonal and team
skills
.7 Meetings
.3 Outputs
.1 Project communications
.2 Project management
plan updates
.3 Project documents updates
.4 Organizational process
assets updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project charter
.2 Project management plan
.3 Project documents
.4 Enterprise environmental
factors
.5 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Communication
requirements analysis
.3 Communication technology
.4 Communication models
.5 Communication methods
.6 Interpersonal and team
skills
.7 Data representation
.8 Meetings
.3 Outputs
.1 Communications
management plan
.2 Project management plan
updates
.3 Project documents update
10.2 Manage
Communications
10.3 Monitor
Communications
Project Communications
Management Overview
Project Communications Management
429
Frederick Brooks illustrates this concept very clearly.2 People are not interchangeable
parts. You cannot assume that a task scheduled to take two months of one person's time
can be done in one month by two people. A popular analogy is that you cannot take nine
women and produce a baby in one month!
It is important to understand individual and group preferences for
communications. As you learned in Chapter 9, people have different personality traits
that often affect their communication preferences. For example, if you want to praise a
project team member for doing a good job, most introverts would be more comfortable
receiving that praise in private, while most extroverts would like everyone to hear
about their good work. An intuitive person would want to understand how something
fits into the big picture, while a sensing person would prefer to have more focused,
step-by-step details. Strong thinkers would want to know the logic behind information,
while feeling people would want to know how the information affects them personally
as well as other people. A judging person would be very driven to meet deadlines with
few reminders, while a perceiving person would need more assistance in developing and
following plans.
However, every person is unique, so you cannot simply generalize based on a
personality profile or other traits. You need to seek first to understand, as author Stephen
Covey suggests in The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People, and put yourself in someone
else's shoes before you can truly communicate.
It is important for project managers and their team members to be aware of their own
communication styles. As you learned in Chapter 9, many IT professionals have different
personality traits than the general population, such as being more introverted, intuitive,
and oriented to thinking (as opposed to feeling). These personality differences can lead
to miscommunication with people who are extroverted, sensation-oriented, and feeling-
oriented. For example, a user guide written by an IT professional might not provide the
detailed steps most users need. Many users also prefer face-to-face meetings or short
videos to learn how to use a new system instead of trying to follow a written guide. They
might prefer to have a two-way conversation in which they can get hands-on experience
and ask questions on the spot.
Also, the receiver of information rarely interprets it exactly as the sender intended.
Therefore, it is important to provide several methods of communication, such as written
words, visuals, videos, and meetings, and an environment that promotes open dialogue.
Instead of assuming that the receiver understands, you can build in a feedback loop
to make sure. For example, several teachers use tools to quickly gauge how well their
students understand a concept. Many are surprised at the difference in what they think
people understand and what they really do. It is also difficult for many people to admit
that they do not understand something. Project managers and their teams must be patient
and flexible when communicating information and focus on making sure their messages
are understood. You cannot overcommunicate!
Geographic location and cultural background also affect the complexity of project
communications. If project stakeholders are in different countries, it is often difficult or
impossible to schedule times for two-way communication during normal working hours.
Language barriers can also cause communication problems; the same word may have
very different meanings in different languages. Times, dates, and other units of measure
Chapter 10
430
are also interpreted differently. People from some cultures also communicate in ways that
might make others uncomfortable. For example, managers in some countries still do not
allow women or workers of lower ranks to give formal presentations. Some cultures also
reserve written documents for binding commitments. Taking the time to research and
understand these nuances of communications early in a project can help tremendously.
Formal and Informal Methods for Communicating
It is not enough for project team members to submit reports to their project managers and
other stakeholders and then assume that everyone who needs to know the information
will read the reports. Occasionally, that approach might work, but many people prefer
informal communications. About half the general population are extroverts, so they
enjoy talking to other people. Often, many nontechnical professionals-from colleagues
to managers-prefer to have a two-way conversation about a project rather than reading
detailed reports, e-mails, or Web pages to try to find pertinent information.
Many colleagues and managers want to know the people working on their projects and
develop a trusting relationship with them. They use informal discussions about the project
to develop these relationships. Therefore, project managers must be good at nurturing
relationships through good communication. Many experts believe that the difference
between good project managers and excellent project managers is their ability to nurture
relationships and use empathic listening skills, as described in Chapter 9, Project
Resource Management.
Oral communication also helps build stronger relationships among project personnel
and project stakeholders. People like to interact with each other to get a true feeling for
how a project is going. Research conducted by Albert Mehrabian and discussed in his book
Silent Messages indicated that in face-to-face interactions information is communicated
W h a t W e n t W r o n g ?
Amusing examples of miscommunications are common, especially when they involve
the use of new technologies. For example, I was teaching an introductory course in
information systems several years ago. Other instructors would often sit in on the course
to learn how to use the latest software applications. One day, students were learning
how to adjust settings and use shortcuts on their computers. I would tell the students
to "right-click" and then select Properties, or "right-click" and then select Copy. At the
end of the class, an instructor quietly approached, waited until the other students were
gone, and then said, "I don't know what I'm doing wrong." She held up a piece of paper
on which she had written the word "click" about a dozen times. In other words, she
literally did write "click" when told to do so instead of right-clicking. I asked, "Are you
a Mac user?" Macintosh computers do not normally have a mouse with two buttons, so
users never have to right-click. I showed the instructor how to right-click with a mouse,
and in future classes made sure to point out operations that were different on PCs than
Macs. As technology continues to change, it's important to be patient and take the time
to make sure stakeholders understand how to use tools relevant to their project.
Project Communications Management
431
through body language, tone of voice, and the spoken content.3 The lesson for project
communications today is that it is important to pay attention to more than someone's
actual words. A person's tone of voice and body language say a lot about how they feel.
Effective creation and distribution of information depends on project managers and
project team members having good communication skills. Communicating includes many
different dimensions such as writing, speaking, and listening, and project personnel need
to use all of these dimensions in their daily routines. In addition, different people respond
positively to different levels or types of communication. For example, a project sponsor
may prefer to stay informed through informal discussions held once a week over coffee. The
project manager needs to be aware of this preference and take advantage of it. The project
sponsor will give better feedback about the project during these informal talks than through
some other form of communication. Informal conversations allow the project sponsor
to exercise a leadership role and provide insights and information that are critical to the
success of the project and the organization as a whole. Short face-to-face meetings are often
more effective than electronic communications, particularly for sensitive information.
Distributing Important Information in an Effective and Timely Manner
It is important to include detailed technical information that affects critical performance
features of products or services developed in a project. It is even more important to
document any changes in technical specifications that might affect product performance.
For example, if the fiber-optic undersea telecommunications program described in the
chapter's opening case included a project to purchase and provide special diving gear, and
the supplier of the oxygen tanks enhanced the tanks so divers could stay under water longer,
other people would need to know about this important new capability. The information
should not be buried in an attachment with the supplier's new product brochure.
People have a tendency to avoid reporting bad news. If the oxygen tank vendor was
behind on production, the person in charge of the project to purchase the tanks might
wait until the last minute to report this critical information. This news could be delivered
quickly via text through a website, e-mail, text message, or similar means. However,
people tend to become overwhelmed by too much information, and they might not
understand what it means to them on their particular project.
Oral communication via meetings and informal talks helps bring important
information-positive or negative-into the open. Because IT projects often require a lot
of coordination, it is a good idea to have short, frequent meetings. For example, some IT
project managers require all project personnel to attend a "stand-up" meeting every week
or even every morning, depending on project needs. Stand-up meetings have no chairs,
which forces people to focus on what they need to communicate. Recall that projects
using an agile approach have daily meetings to make sure everyone is on the same page.
If people can't meet face to face, they can have virtual meetings instead.
Setting the Stage for Communicating Bad News
It is important to put information in context, especially if it's bad news. If there is a
problem, know how it will affect the whole project and the organization. Bad news might
seem like a major setback, but you can recommend steps to take to mitigate a problem.
Project sponsors and other senior managers want to know that you have evaluated the
Chapter 10
432
impact of the situation, considered alternatives, and made a recommendation based on your
expertise. Project managers should know how a major problem might affect the bottom line
of the organization and be able to use their leadership skills to handle the challenge.
An amusing example of how to mitigate bad news is provided in the following letter
from a college student to her parents. Variations of this letter can be found on many
websites.
Dear Mom and Dad, or should I say Grandma & Grandpa,
Yes, I am pregnant. No, I'm not married yet since Larry, my boyfriend, is out of a job.
Larry's employers just don't seem to appreciate the skills he has learned since he
quit high school. Larry looks much younger than you, Dad, even though he is three
years older. I'm quitting college and getting a job so we can get an apartment before
the baby is born. I found a beautiful apartment above a 24-hour auto repair garage
with good insulation so the exhaust fumes and noise won't bother us.
I'm very happy. I thought you would be too.
Love, Ashley
P.S. There is no Larry. I'm not pregnant. I'm not getting married. I'm not quitting
school, but I am getting a "D" in Chemistry. I just wanted you to have some
perspective.
Determining the Number of Communication Channels
Another important aspect of communications is the number of people involved in a
project. As the number increases, the complexity of communication increases because
there are more channels or pathways through which people can communicate. You can
use the following simple formula to determine the number of communication channels as
the number of people involved in a project increases:
5
2
n n
Number of communication channels
(
1)
2
where n is the number of people involved.
For example, two people have one communication channel:
2
5
(2(2
1))/2
1. Three
people have three channels:
2
5
(3(3
1))/2
3. Four people have six channels, five people
have 10, and so on. Figure 10-2 illustrates this concept. You can see that as the number
of people increases above three, the number of communication channels increases
rapidly. Project managers should try to limit the size of teams or subteams to avoid
making communications too complex. For example, if three people are working together
on a particular project task, they have three communication channels. If you added two
more people to their team, you would have 10 communication channels, an increase
of seven. If you added three more people instead of two, you'd have 12 communication
channels. You can see how quickly communication becomes more complex as you
increase team size.
Project Communications Management
433
Good communicators consider many factors before deciding how to distribute
information, including the size of the group, the type of information, and the appropriate
communication medium. People often send e-mail messages that are quickly written
and therefore not as carefully planned as they should be. While this can be a problem
even with a small group of five recipients, the negative effects multiply many times when
sending such a message to a group of 500 people or more. When asked why you cannot
always send an e-mail to a very large team of people just as you could to a small one,
one CIO answered, "As a group increases in size, you have a whole slew of management
challenges. Communicating badly exponentially increases the possibility of making fatal
mistakes. A large-scale project has a lot of moving parts, which makes it that much easier
to break down. Communication is the oil that keeps everything working properly. It's
much easier to address an atmosphere of distrust among a group of five team members
than it is with a team of 500 members."4
However, in some situations you cannot have face-to-face meetings and must e-mail
a large group of people. Many IT professionals work on virtual projects in which they
never meet their project sponsors, other team members, or other project stakeholders.
In a virtual project environment, it is crucial for project managers to develop clear
communication procedures. They must use e-mail, Web conferencing, instant messaging,
discussion threads, project websites, and other technologies to communicate most
information. They might be able to use phone calls or other media occasionally, but in
general, they must rely on good written communications.
As you can see, project communication involves more than creating and sending
status reports or holding periodic meetings. Many good project managers know their
Figure 10-2  The impact of the number of people on communication channels
3 people, 3 communication channels
2 people, 1 communication channel
4 people, 6 communication channels, etc.
Number of communication channels = n(n - 1)
2
Chapter 10
434
personal strengths and weaknesses in this area and surround themselves with people
who complement their skills, just as Peter Gumpert did in the opening case by asking
Christine to be his assistant. It is good practice to share the responsibility for project
communications management with the entire project team.
Planning Communications Management
Because communication is so important on projects, every project should include a
communications management plan-a document that guides project communications.
This plan should be part of the overall project management plan, as you learned in
Chapter 4, Project Integration Management. The communications management plan
varies with the needs of the project, but some type of written plan should always be
prepared. For small projects, such as the project management intranet site project
described in Chapter 3, the communications management plan can be part of the team
charter. For large projects, it should be a separate document. The communications
management plan should address the following items:
1. Stakeholder communications requirements
2. Information to be communicated, including format, content, and level of
detail
3. Who will receive the information and who will produce it
4. Suggested methods or technologies for conveying the information
5. Frequency of communication
6. Escalation procedures for resolving issues
7. Revision procedures for updating the communications management plan
8. A glossary of common terminology
It is important to know what kinds of information will be distributed to particular
stakeholders. By analyzing stakeholder communication needs, you can avoid wasting time
or money on creating or disseminating unnecessary information.
Table 10-1 provides part of a sample stakeholder communications analysis that
shows which stakeholders should get particular written communications. Note that the
stakeholder communications analysis includes columns that list the contact person
for the information, when the information is due, and the preferred format for the
information. Notice that the first stakeholder, customer management, wants a hard copy
of the monthly status reports plus a meeting to talk about them. You can create a similar
table to show which stakeholders should attend particular formal project meetings. It
is always a good idea to include comment sections with these types of tables to record
special considerations or details related to each stakeholder, document, meeting, or other
component. Have stakeholders review and approve the stakeholder communications
analysis to ensure that the information is correct and useful.
Many projects do not include enough initial information on communications.
Project managers, top management, and project team members often assume that
using existing communication channels to relay project information is sufficient. The
Project Communications Management
435
problem with using existing channels is that each group (as well as other stakeholders)
has different communication needs. Creating some sort of communications management
plan and reviewing it with project stakeholders early in a project helps prevent or
reduce later communication problems. If an organization works on many projects,
developing some consistency in handling project communications helps the organization
run smoothly.
Consistent communication helps organizations improve project communications,
especially for programs composed of multiple projects. For example, Peter Gumpert,
the program manager in the opening case, would benefit greatly from having a
communications management plan that all of his project managers help develop and
follow. Because several of the projects have some of the same stakeholders, it is even more
important to develop a coordinated communications management plan. For example, if
customers receive status reports from Peter's company that have totally different formats
and do not coordinate information from related projects within the same company, they
will question the ability of Peter's company to manage large programs.
Information about the content of essential project communications comes from
the work breakdown structure (WBS). In fact, many WBSs include a section for project
communications to ensure that reporting key information is a project deliverable. If
Stakeholders
Document
Name
Document
Format
Contact Person
Due
Customer
management
Monthly status
report
Hard copy
and meeting
Tina Erndt,
Tom Silva
First of month
Customer
business staff
Monthly status
report
Hard copy
Julie Grant,
Sergey Cristobal
First of month
Customer
technical staff
Monthly status
report
E-mail
Li Chau, Nancy
Michaels
First of month
Internal
management
Monthly status
report
Hard copy
and meeting
Bob Thomson
First of month
Internal business
and technical staff
Monthly status
report
Intranet
Angie Liu
First of month
Training
subcontractor
Training plan
Hard copy
Jonathan Kraus
November 1
Software
subcontractor
Software
implementation
plan
E-mail
Najwa Gates
June 1
Comments: Put the titles and dates of documents in e-mail headings and have recipients
acknowledge receipt.
Table 10-1  Sample stakeholder communications analysis
Chapter 10
436
reporting essential information is an activity defined in the WBS, it becomes even more
important to know what project information to report, when to report it, how to report it,
and who is responsible for generating the report.
Managing Communications
Managing communications is a large part of a project manager's job. Getting
project information to the right people at the right time and in a useful format is
just as important as developing the information in the first place. The stakeholder
communications analysis serves as a good starting point for managing communications.
Project managers and their teams must decide who receives particular information,
but they must also determine the best way to create and distribute the information.
Is it sufficient to send written reports for project information? Is text appropriate,
or would visuals or even videos communicate the information better? Are meetings
alone effective in distributing some project information? Are meetings and written
communications both required for project information? What is the best way to provide
information to virtual team members?
During project execution, project teams must address important considerations
for managing information, and they often end up updating business processes through
improved communications. For example, they might modify policies and procedures,
modify information systems, or incorporate new technologies to improve information
distribution. For example, Peter Gumpert, the program manager in the opening case,
might decide that providing key project members with special apps on smartphones would
enhance communications. He would need to request additional funds to provide these
devices and apps, and training on how to use them.
After answering key questions related to project communications, project managers
and their teams must decide on the best way to create and distribute the information.
Important considerations include the use of technology, the appropriate methods and
media to use, and performance reporting.
Using Technology to Enhance Information Creation and Distribution
Technology can facilitate the process of creating and distributing information, when
used effectively. Most people and businesses rely on e-mail, instant messaging, websites,
telephones, cell phones, texting, and other technologies to communicate. Using a project
management information system, you can create and organize project documents,
schedules, meeting minutes, and customer requests, and make them available in an
electronic format. You can store this information locally or in the cloud. Storing templates
and samples of project documents electronically can make accessing standard forms easier,
thus making information distribution easier. It is also important to have backup procedures
in place in case something goes wrong with normal communications technologies, as
described in the "Global Issues" feature later in this chapter. Two important considerations
in deciding which technologies to use include the communication method and media, as
described in the next sections. You will learn more about using software to assist in project
communications management later in this chapter.
Project Communications Management
437
Selecting the Appropriate Communication Methods and Media
There are three broad classifications for communication methods:
1. Interactive communication: As the name implies, two or more people
interact to exchange information via meetings, phone calls, or video
conferencing. This method is usually the most effective way to ensure
common understanding.
2. Push communication: Information is sent or pushed to recipients without
their request via reports, e-mails, faxes, voice mails, and other means. This
G l o b a l I s s u e s
Natural disasters often disrupt communications around the world. For example, the
scale of the damage to Japan's communications infrastructure after a 9.0 magnitude
earthquake in March 2011 was unprecedented. Fortunately, thousands of employees
from Nippon Telegraph and Telephone (NTT) East worked around the clock to restore
communications. As a result of their efforts, 4.75 million public phone calls were made
on the day after the disaster. The following list summarizes some facts and figures about
the damage and the recovery efforts:

Approximately 90 trunk lines were severed as a result of damage to bridges and
railways.

990 exchange buildings were left without power.

1.5 million lines were damaged.

16 exchange buildings were destroyed.

2,700 km of aerial cables were damaged.

3,930 emergency-use public phone lines were set up.

NTT East donated 30,000 telephones to local authorities.

450 emergency Internet access points were created.5
It's great that communications can be restored a day after a disaster, but often that's
too late. The April 2015 Nepal earthquake killed over 8,800 people and injured more than
23,000. After cell phone and Internet connections disappeared, several people turned to
older technology, like ham radios, to communicate information about missing victims
quickly.
To improve communications when the next disaster hits, researchers have been
working on a better solution. Danish designers Pernille Skjødt and Ida Stougaard created
a device called Reachi, which was a finalist in the 2015 Global Social Venture Competi-
tion. It uses a technology called mesh-networking that sends a signal from person to
person-the same technology used in the smartphone app called FireChat. The Reachi
is a single-function device that is sturdier than a phone, can survive immersion in water,
and runs on solar power. "The designers are currently finishing their final proof of con-
cept and coordinating with the Philippines Red Cross to plan a rollout across the coun-
try. Eventually, they hope to bring it to other countries as well. It's something that could
be useful anywhere; even the most-connected places on Earth can't easily communicate
when standard infrastructure breaks."6
Chapter 10
438
method ensures that the information is distributed, but does not ensure that
it was received or understood.
3. Pull communication: Information is sent to recipients at their request via
websites, bulletin boards, e-learning, knowledge repositories like blogs and
wikis, and other means.
In addition to determining the appropriate method or methods for communicating
specific project information, it is important to consider which media to use. For example,
if you know that you must use interactive communication to review an important topic
with the project sponsor, you still need to determine which media to use. Table 10-2
provides guidelines from Practical Communications, Inc., a communications consulting
Key: 1 5 Excellent, 2 5 Adequate, 3 5 Inappropriate
How Well Medium Is Suited to:
Hard
Copy
Phone
Call
Voice
Mail
E-mail
Meeting
Website
Assessing commitment
3
2
3
3
1
3
Building consensus
3
2
3
3
1
3
Mediating a conflict
3
2
3
3
1
3
Resolving a misunderstanding
3
1
3
3
2
3
Addressing negative behavior
3
2
3
2
1
3
Expressing support or appreciation
1
2
2
1
2
3
Encouraging creative thinking
2
3
3
1
3
3
Making an ironic statement
3
2
2
3
1
3
Conveying a reference document
1
3
3
3
3
2
Reinforcing one's authority
1
2
3
3
1
1
Providing a permanent record
1
3
3
1
3
3
Maintaining confidentiality
2
1
2
3
1
3
Conveying simple information
3
1
1
1
2
3
Asking an informational question
3
1
1
1
3
3
Making a simple request
3
1
1
1
3
3
Giving complex instructions
3
3
2
2
1
2
Addressing many people
2
3 or 1*
2
2
3
1
*Depends on system functionality
Source: Tess Galati, Email Composition and Communication (EmC2), Practical
Communications, (2001)
Table 10-2  Media choice table
Project Communications Management
439
firm, about how well different types of media are suited to different communication
needs. These media include hard copy, phone calls, voice mail, e-mail, meetings, and
websites. For example, if you were trying to assess commitment of project stakeholders,
a meeting would be the most appropriate medium to use. (A face-to-face meeting would
be preferable, but a Web conference, in which participants could see and hear each other,
would also qualify as a meeting.) A phone call would be adequate, but the other media
would not be appropriate. Project managers must assess the needs of the organization, the
project, and individuals in determining which communication medium to use and when.
They must also be aware of new technologies that can enhance communications and
collaboration, as described in the following What Went Wrong? feature.
W h a t W e n t W r o n g ?
A Frost & Sullivan study sponsored by Verizon Business and Microsoft Corp., called
"Meetings Around the World: The Impact of Collaboration on Business Performance,"
found that collaboration is a key driver of overall performance of companies around
the world. The impact of collaboration is twice as significant as a company's aggressive-
ness in pursuing new market opportunities and five times as significant as the external
market environment. The study defines collaboration as an interaction between culture
and technology, such as audio and Web conferencing, e-mail, and instant messaging.
The researchers also created a method to measure how collaboration affects business
performance.
Of all the collaboration technologies that were studied, three were more commonly
present in high-performing companies than in low-performing ones: Web conferencing,
audio conferencing, and meeting-scheduler technologies. "This study reveals a powerful
new metric business leaders can use to more successfully manage their companies and
achieve competitive advantage," said Brian Cotton, a vice president at Frost & Sullivan.
"Measuring the quality and capability of collaboration in a given organization presents an
opportunity for management to prioritize technology investments, encourage adoption of
new tools and open up communications lines for improved collaboration."7
The study also revealed regional differences in how people in various countries
prefer to communicate with one another. These differences highlight an opportunity for
greater cultural understanding to improve collaborative efforts around the world. For
example:

American professionals are more likely to enjoy working alone, and they prefer
to send e-mail rather than call a person or leave a voice mail message. They are
also more comfortable with audio, video, and Web conferencing technologies
than people from other regions. In addition, they tend to multitask the most
when on conference calls.

Europeans thrive on teamwork more than their counterparts elsewhere and
prefer to interact in real time with other people. They are more likely to feel
that it is irresponsible not to answer the phone, and they want people to call
them back rather than leave a voice mail message.
(continued)
Chapter 10
440
Reporting Performance
Another important tool for managing project communications is performance reporting.
Performance reporting keeps stakeholders informed about how resources are being used
to achieve project objectives. It also motivates workers to have some progress to report.
Recall from Chapter 1 that progress reports are considered to be a super tool-a tool that
is extensively used and has been found to improve project performance. Performance
reports are normally provided as progress reports or status reports. Many people use the
two terms interchangeably, but some people distinguish between them as follows:

Progress reports describe what the project team has accomplished during
a certain period. Many projects have each team member prepare a monthly
report or sometimes a weekly progress report. Team leaders often create
consolidated progress reports based on the information received from team
members. A sample template for a monthly progress report is provided later
in this chapter.

Status reports describe where the project stands at a specific point in
time. Status reports address where the project stands in terms of the triple
constraint, meeting scope, time, and cost goals. How much money has
been spent to date? How long did it take to do certain tasks? Is work being
accomplished as planned? Status reports can take various formats depending
on the stakeholders' needs. As described in Chapter 2, when using agile
project management, progress is communicated via daily Scrum meetings
and burndown charts.
Forecasts predict future project status and progress based on past information and
trends. How long will it take to finish the project based on how things are going? How
much more money will be needed to complete the project? Project managers can use

Professionals in the Asia-Pacific region, more than anywhere else, want to be
in touch constantly during the workday. As a result, they find the phone to be
an indispensable tool and prefer instant messaging to e-mail.
In a follow-up study sponsored by Verizon and Cisco, Frost & Sullivan examined the
role that collaboration solutions play in enabling high levels of organizational performance
and developed a model for measuring return on collaboration (ROC). Surveys from 3,662
managers across the globe were analyzed to estimate the return generated from deploying
collaboration technology in critical business activities from six functional areas: innova-
tions and new product development (Research & Development), employee retention and
churn/attrition (Human Resources), sales performance (Sales), customer acquisition
(Marketing), shareholder value (Investor Relations), and corporate reputation (Public
Relations). The study results show the highest returns in the areas of sales performance
and innovations and new product development. "Our main finding was striking: As organi-
zations deploy and use IP-enabled, advanced collaboration tools in their operations, they
are able to perform better on business critical activities, and realize a higher return on
their collaboration.8
Project Communications Management
441
earned value management (see Chapter 7, Project Cost Management) to answer these
questions by estimating the budget at completion and projected completion date based on
how the project is progressing.
An important technique for performance reporting is the status review meeting.
Status review meetings, as described in Chapter 4, Project Integration Management, are
a good way to highlight information provided in important project documents, empower
people to be accountable for their work, and have face-to-face discussions about important
project issues. Many program and project managers hold periodic status review meetings
to exchange important project information and motivate people to make progress on their
parts of the project. Likewise, many top managers hold monthly or quarterly status review
meetings in which program and project managers must report overall status information.
Status review meetings sometimes become battlegrounds where conflicts between
different parties come to a head. Project managers or higher-level top managers should set
ground rules for status review meetings to control the amount of conflict and should work
to resolve any potential problems. It is important to remember that project stakeholders
should work together to address performance problems.
A d v i c e f o r Y o u n g P r o f e s s i o n a l s
If you are working on a protect team but never attended a status review meeting, ask
your project manager if you can attend one. You can learn a lot about your own project
and other projects going on in the organization. You will also see firsthand how senior
management reacts to different information and what their key concerns are. Hopefully
there is good discussion about important issues. If you go on to attend or present at
future status review meetings, don't be afraid to ask questions and provide your own
suggestions during discussions.
Monitoring Communications
The main goal of monitoring communications is to ensure the optimal flow of information
throughout the entire project life cycle. The project manager and project team should
use expert judgment, project management information systems, data representation,
interpersonal and team skills, and meetings to assess how well communications are
working. If communication problems exist, the project manager and team need to take
action, which often requires changes to the earlier processes of planning and managing
project communications. The main outputs of monitoring communications are work
performance information, change requests, project management plan updates, and project
documents updates.
It is often beneficial to have a facilitator from outside the project team assess
how well communications are working. A facilitator can also help the team solve any
communication problems. Many project teams need help in improving communications,
and many internal and external experts are available to help. The following section also
provides suggestions for improving project communications.
Chapter 10
442
Suggestions For Improving Project Communications
Good communication is vital to the management and success of IT projects. So far in this
chapter, you have learned that project communications management can ensure that
essential information reaches the right people at the right time, that feedback and reports
are appropriate and useful, and that there are formalized processes for planning, managing,
and controlling communications. This section highlights a few areas that all project
managers and project team members should consider in their quests to improve project
communications. This section provides guidelines for developing better communication
skills, running effective meetings, using e-mail, instant messaging, texting, kanban boards,
and collaborative tools effectively, and using templates for project communications.
Developing Better Communication Skills
Some people seem to be born with great communication skills. Others seem to have a
knack for picking up technical skills. It is rare to find someone with a natural ability for
both. Both types of skills, however, can be developed. Most IT professionals enter the field
because of their technical skills. Most find, however, that communication skills are the key
to advancing in their careers, especially if they want to become good project managers.
Most companies spend a lot of money on technical training for their employees, even
when employees might benefit more from communications training. Individuals are also
more likely to enroll voluntarily in classes to learn the latest technology than in classes
that develop soft skills.
Communication skills training usually includes role-playing activities in which
participants learn concepts such as building rapport, as described in Chapter 9, Project
Resource Management. Training sessions also give participants a chance to develop
specific skills in small groups. Sessions that focus on presentation skills typically use video
to record the participants' presentations. Most people are surprised to see some of their
mannerisms and enjoy the challenge of improving their skills. A minimal investment in
communication and presentation training can have a tremendous payback to individuals,
their projects, and their organizations.
As organizations become more global, they realize that they must also invest in
ways to improve communication with people from different countries and cultures. For
example, Apple released their new 2015 operating system, which included hundreds of
diverse emojis to appeal to users all over the world.
Many Americans are raised to speak their minds, while in some other cultures
people are offended by outspokenness. Decision makers from several countries, such as
China, focus on building personal relationships and trust rather than on facts and quick
responses, like Americans. Not understanding how to communicate effectively with people
of other cultures and diverse backgrounds hurts projects and businesses. Many training
courses are available to educate people in cultural awareness, international business,
and international team building. Workers also need to learn how to participate in virtual
meetings and conference calls. Some people take these skills for granted, but many people
need assistance in becoming comfortable and productive in new work environments.
It takes leadership to help improve communication. If top management lets employees
give poor presentations, write sloppy reports, offend people from different cultures, or behave
Project Communications Management
443
poorly at meetings, the employees will not want to improve their communication skills. Top
management must set high expectations and lead by example. Some organizations send all IT
professionals to training that includes development of technical and communication skills.
Successful organizations allocate time in project schedules for preparing drafts of important
reports and presentations and incorporating feedback on the drafts. It is good practice to
include time for informal meetings with customers to help develop relationships and provide
staff to assist in relationship management. As with any other goal, communication can be
improved with proper planning, support, and leadership from top management.
M e d i a S n a p s h o t
Many readers of this book grew up using social media sites like Facebook and Twitter. You
may be surprised to learn that 93 percent of recruiters check out social media profiles of
prospective hires. A 2014 article in Money magazine provides a list of "10 Social Media
Blunders That Cost a Millennial a Job-or Worse," as follows:
1. Posting something embarrassing on the corporate Twitter feed.
2. Sexual oversharing.
3. Revealing company secrets.
4. Blowing your own cover.
5. Talking smack about a job before you've even accepted it.
6. Making fun of clients or donors.
7. Making fun of your boss/team.
8. Posting while you're supposed to be working.
9. Complaining about your job.
10. Drinking in a photo-even if you're over 21.9
Running Effective Meetings
A well-run meeting can be a vehicle for fostering team building and reinforcing
expectations, roles, relationships, and commitment to the project. However, a poorly
run meeting can have a detrimental effect on a project. For example, a terrible kick-off
meeting may cause important stakeholders to decide not to support the project further.
Many people complain about the time they waste in unnecessary or poorly planned
and poorly executed meetings. The following guidelines can help improve time spent at
meetings:

Determine if a meeting can be avoided. Do not have a meeting if there is a
better way to achieve the objective at hand. For example, a project manager
might need approval from a top manager to hire another person for the
project team. It could take a week or longer to schedule even a 10-minute
meeting on the top manager's calendar. Instead, an e-mail or phone call
describing the situation and justifying the request is a faster, more effective
approach than having a meeting. However, you often do need a face-to-face
Chapter 10
444
meeting in certain situations because using e-mail or a phone call would be
inappropriate. Consider which medium would be most effective.

Define the purpose and intended outcome of the meeting. Be specific about
what should happen as a result of the meeting. Is the purpose to brainstorm
ideas, provide status information, or solve a problem? Make the purpose of
a meeting very clear to all meeting planners and participants. For example,
if a project manager calls a meeting of all project team members without
knowing the true purpose of the meeting, everyone will focus on their own
agendas and very little will be accomplished. All meetings should have a
purpose and intended outcome.

Determine who should attend the meeting. Do certain stakeholders have to
be at a meeting to make it effective? Should only the project team leaders
attend a meeting, or should the entire project team be involved? Many
meetings are most effective with the minimum number of participants
possible, especially if decisions must be made. Other meetings require many
attendees. It is important to determine who should attend a meeting based
on its purpose and intended outcome.

Provide an agenda to participants before the meeting. Meetings are most
effective when the participants come prepared. Did they read reports
before the meeting? Did they collect necessary information? Some
professionals refuse to attend meetings if they do not have an agenda
ahead of time. Insisting on an agenda forces meeting organizers to plan the
meeting and gives potential participants the chance to decide whether they
need to attend.

Prepare handouts and visual aids, and make logistical arrangements
ahead of time. By creating handouts and visual aids, you must organize
thoughts and ideas. This usually helps the entire meeting run more
effectively. It is also important to make logistical arrangements by booking
an appropriate room, having necessary equipment available, and providing
refreshments or entire meals, if appropriate. It takes time to plan for effective
meetings. Project managers and their team members must take time to
prepare for meetings, especially important ones with key stakeholders.

Run the meeting professionally. Introduce people, restate the purpose
of the meeting, and state any ground rules that attendees should follow.
Have someone facilitate the meeting to make sure that important items are
discussed, watch the time, encourage participation, summarize key issues,
and clarify decisions and action items. Designate someone to take minutes
and then send them to all participants soon after the meeting. Minutes
should be short and focus on the crucial decisions and action items from the
meeting.

Set the ground rules for the meeting. State up front how the meeting will
be run. For example, can people speak at will, or will the facilitator lead
discussions? Can attendees use their laptops or other electronic devices
during the meeting? Don't assume that all meetings are run in the same way.
Do what works best in each specific case.
Project Communications Management
445

Build relationships. Depending on the culture of the organization and
project, it may help to build relationships by making meetings fun
experiences. For example, it may be appropriate to use humor, refreshments,
or prizes for good ideas to keep meeting participants actively involved. If
used effectively, meetings are a good way to build relationships.
Using E-Mail, Instant Messaging, Texting, Kanban Boards,
and Collaborative Tools Effectively
Because most people use e-mail and other electronic communication tools now,
communications should improve, right? Not necessarily. In fact, few people have received
any training or guidelines on when or how to use e-mail, instant messaging, texting, video
conferencing, kanban boards, or other collaborative tools, such as Microsoft SharePoint
portals, Google Docs, or wikis. A SharePoint portal allows users to create custom websites
to access documents and applications stored on shared devices. Google Docs allows users
to create, share, and edit documents, spreadsheets, and presentations online. A wiki is a
B e s t P r a c t i c e
One of the main features of kanban is visualizing workflow, which is often done by
using kanban boards. Figure 10-3 provides a very simple example of a kanban board.
Notice that the main categories where tasks are placed include To Do, In Progress, and
Done. Team members work together to complete all of the tasks, clearly showing which
ones need to be done (in the To Do section), which ones are being worked on (in the
In Progress section), and which ones are completed (in the Done section). People using
kanban boards can tailor the concept to meet their needs. For example, they could cre-
ate a physical board or use a wall in their office environment, write the names of tasks
on sticky notes, and physically move the sticky notes along the board or wall. Or, a
team could use an online tool to enter and track their workflow. They could add people's
names to each task, color code tasks, include a calendar, or use whatever approach helps
the team improve their performance.
Figure 10-3  Sample kanban board
To Do
Task 4
Task 7
Task 8
Task 2
Task 5
Task 6
Task 1
Task 3
In Progress
Done
Source: Kathy Schwalbe, An Introduction to Project Management, Fifth Edition (2015)
Chapter 10
446
website that enables anyone who accesses it to contribute to or modify its content. Kanban
boards visually show tasks that need to be done, are in progress, or are completed. They have
become a popular tool to improve communications, as described in the Best Practice feature.
Even if people do know when to use e-mail or other tools for project communications,
they also need to know how to use the tools. New features are added to software programs
with every release, but often users are unaware of these features and do not receive
training on how to use them. Do you know how to organize and file your e-mail messages,
or do you have hundreds of them in your inbox? Do you know how to use your address
book or how to create distribution lists? Have you ever used sorting features to find e-mail
messages or documents by date, author, or key words? Do you use filtering software
to prevent spam? Do you know how to share your desktop with instant messaging to
teach someone how to use software on your computer? Do you know how to track and
incorporate changes in Google Docs to create reports and spreadsheets as a collaborative
effort? Does everyone on your project team know how to use important features of your
SharePoint portal or wiki? Are you using a software tool for creating kanban boards that
is tailored to meet your needs? Project teams and organizations that emphasize using
a shared repository for good communications are often more productive. Many project
management software tools include the ability to share project documents and other
communications, but processes must be established first and followed.
Something as simple as a standard college course illustrates these issues. Many college
courses now use online course management software like Moodle or Blackboard. Instructors
have learned to post the course syllabus, handouts, lecture notes, and other documents
for the entire class to share. Students are often required to take quizzes, participate in
discussions, and post their own files on a central site. Posting all information in one location
enhances communications. If the instructor states in the syllabus that students must check
their e-mail frequently for course information, they will do so, even though they might
prefer to use text messaging. If they fail to check their e-mail, participate in discussions, or
generally use the online course tools, the consequences will affect their grades.
Even if you know how to use all the features of these communication systems,
you will likely still need to learn how to put ideas into words clearly and effectively.
For example, the subject line for any e-mail message you write should clearly state the
intention of the e-mail. Folder and file names for collaborative projects should be clear
and follow file naming conventions, if provided. A business professional who does not
write well might prefer to talk to people than to send an e-mail or instant message. Poor
writing often leads to misunderstandings and confusion.
Project managers should do whatever they can to help their project stakeholders use
e-mail, instant messaging, texting, and other tools effectively and not waste time with
poor or unclear communications. Information sent via e-mail, instant messaging, texting,
or a collaborative tool should be appropriate for that medium. If you can communicate
the information better with a phone call or meeting, for example, then do so. If you
introduce a new technique, such as kanban boards, be sure to tailor it to meet your needs.
Do not use new tools because they are the latest fad. Use them because they improve
communications and productivity. Learn how to use important features of your e-mail,
texting, instant messaging, and collaborative software, and make sure that everyone on
your team also learns.
Project Communications Management
447
The following guidelines can help you use e-mail as a more effective communication tool:

Be sure to send e-mail to the right people. Do not automatically "reply to all"
on an e-mail, for example, if it is not necessary.

Use meaningful subject lines in e-mails so readers can quickly see what
information the message contains. If the entire message can fit in the
subject line, put it there. For example, if a meeting is cancelled, just enter
that message in the subject line. Also, do not continue replying to an e-mail
thread when the subject has changed without changing the subject line. The
subject line should always relate to the latest topic.

Limit the content of the e-mail to one main subject. Send a second or third
e-mail if it relates to a different subject.

The body of the e-mail should be as clear and concise as possible. Use as
few words as possible while maintaining a clear and friendly tone. If three
questions need to be answered, number them as questions 1, 2, and 3 and
put each on a separate line.

Always reread your e-mail before you send it. Also, be sure to check your
spelling using the spell-check function.

Limit the number and size of e-mail attachments. If you can include a link to
an online version of a document instead of attaching a file, do so.

Delete e-mail that you do not need to save or that does not require a
response. Do not even open e-mail that you know is not important, such as
spam. Use the e-mail blocking feature of the software, if available, to block
unwanted junk mail.

Make sure that your virus protection software is up to date. Never open
e-mail attachments if you do not trust the source.

Respond to e-mail quickly, if possible. It will take you longer to open and read
the e-mail again later. In addition, if you send an e-mail that does not require
a response, make that clear as well.

If you need to keep e-mail, file each message appropriately. Create folders
with meaningful names to file the e-mail messages you want to keep. File
them as soon as possible.
Most people are comfortable with using e-mail, but some may not be familiar with
other technologies. Develop a strategy for getting users up to date, and discuss when it's
best to use other technologies versus e-mail. The following additional guidelines can help
you use other communication tools more effectively:

Collaborative tools continue to advance. Make sure that your team is using a
good tool. Many, like Google Docs and several wikis, are available for free.

Be sure to authorize the right people to share your collaborative documents. Also
ensure that other security is in place. Confidential project documents should
probably not be stored on Google Docs. Use more secure tools when needed.

Make sure that the right person can authorize changes to shared documents
and that you back up files.

Develop a logical structure for organizing and filing shared documents. Use
good file-naming conventions for folder and document names.
Chapter 10
448
Using Templates for Project Communications
Many intelligent people have a hard time writing a performance report or preparing a
10-minute technical presentation for a customer review. Some people in these situations
are too embarrassed to ask for help. To make it easier to prepare project communications,
project managers need to provide examples and templates for common project
communications such as project descriptions, project charters, monthly performance
reports, and issue logs. Good documentation from past projects can be an ample source of
examples. Samples and templates of both written and oral reports are particularly helpful for
people who have never had to write project documents or give project presentations. Finding,
developing, and sharing relevant templates and sample documents are important tasks for
many project managers. Be sure to check if there are standard templates available and/or
required by your own organization or sponsor. Several examples of project documentation
are provided throughout this text, including a business case, project charter, scope statement,
stakeholder analysis, WBS, Gantt chart, and cost estimate. The Companion website for this
text includes the actual files used to create the templates for these sample documents. A few
of these templates and guidelines for preparing them are provided in this section.
Figure 10-4 shows a sample template for a brief project description. This form could
be used to show a snapshot of an entire project on one page. For example, top managers
Figure 10-4  Sample template for a project description
Start Project
Main Task 1
Project X Description
Scope: Brieﬂy describe the scope of the project. What business functions are involved,
and what are the main products the project will produce?
Summarize the most critical assumptions for the project.
Assumptions:
Cost: Provide the total estimated cost of the project. If desired, list the total cost
each year.
Schedule: Provide summary information from the project's Gantt chart, as shown.
Focus on summary tasks and milestones.
Deliverable 1
Main Task 2
Deliverable 2
Main Task 3
Deliverable 3
End Project
Task Name
May
Objective: Describe the objective of the project in one or two sentences. Focus on
the business beneﬁts of doing the project.
June
July
August
September October November December January
6/1
7/26
10/18
12/27
12/27
Project Communications Management
449
I.
Accomplishments for January (or appropriate month):

Describe most important accomplishments. Relate them to project's
Gantt chart.

Describe other important accomplishments, one bullet for each.
If any issues were resolved from the previous month, list them as
accomplishments.
II.
Plans for February (or following month):

Describe most important items to accomplish in the next month. Again,
relate them to project's Gantt chart.

Describe other important items to accomplish, one bullet for each.
III.
Issues: Briefly list important issues that surfaced or are still important. Managers
hate surprises and want to help the project succeed, so be sure to list issues.
IV.
Project Changes (Dates and Description): List any approved or requested
changes to the project. Include the date of the change and a brief description.
Table 10-3  Sample template for a monthly progress report
might require that all project managers provide a brief project description as part of a
quarterly management review meeting. Peter Gumpert, the program manager in the
opening case, might request this type of document from all of his project managers to get
an overall picture of what each project involves. A project description should include the
project objective, scope, assumptions, cost information, and schedule information. This
template suggests including information from the project's Gantt chart to highlight key
deliverables and other milestones.
Table 10-3 shows a template for a monthly progress report. Sections of the progress
report include accomplishments from the current period, plans for the next period, issues,
and project changes. Recall that progress reports focus on accomplishments during a
specific time period, while status reports focus on where the project stands at a certain
point in time. Because progress and status reports are effective ways to communicate
project information, it is important for project teams to tailor the reports to meet their
specific needs. Some organizations, such as JWD Consulting from Chapter 3, combine
both progress and status information on the same template.
Table 10-4 provides a list of all of the documentation that should be organized and
filed at the end of a major project. From this list, you can see that a large project can
generate a lot of documentation. In fact, some project professionals have observed that
documentation for designing an airplane seems to weigh more than the airplane itself.
(Smaller projects usually generate much less documentation!)
The project manager and project team members should prepare a lessons-learned
report-a reflective statement that documents important information they have learned
from working on the project. The project manager often combines information from all of
the lessons-learned reports into a project summary report. See Chapter 3 for an example
of this type of lessons-learned report. Some items discussed in lessons-learned reports
include reflections on whether project goals were met, whether the project was successful
or not, the causes of variances on the project, the reasoning behind corrective actions
chosen, the use of different project management tools and techniques, and personal words
Chapter 10
450
of wisdom based on team members' experiences. On some projects, all project members
are required to write a brief lessons-learned report; on other projects, just the team lead
or the project manager writes the report. These reports provide valuable reflections by
people who know what worked or did not work on the project. Everyone learns in different
ways and has different insights into a project, so it is helpful to have more than one person
provide inputs on the lessons-learned reports. These reports can be an excellent resource
and can help future projects run more smoothly. To reinforce the benefits of lessons-
learned reports, some companies require new project managers to read past lessons-
learned reports and discuss how they will incorporate some of the ideas into their own
projects. It is also important to organize and prepare project archives. Project archives are
a complete set of organized project records that provide an accurate history of the project.
These archives can provide valuable information for future projects as well.
In the past few years, more and more project teams have started putting all or
part of their project information on project websites, including various templates and
lessons-learned reports. Project websites provide a centralized way of delivering project
documents and other communications. Project teams can develop project websites using
wikis, Web authoring tools, or by using free or paid sites available from Google, Basecamp,
Atlassian, and many other companies. The project team should be sure to address
important issues in creating and using a project website, such as security, access, and the
type of content that should be included.
Project teams can use one of the many software products available to assist in
project communications through the Web. These products vary considerably in price and
functionality, as you learned in Chapter 1. For example, Figure 10-5 shows the six core
tools available when using Basecamp, a tool available to educators for free for an unlimited
time. Note, however, that several key features such as creating Gantt charts and network
I.
Project description
II.
Project proposal and backup data (request for proposal, statement of work,
proposal correspondence, and so on)
III.
Original and revised contract information and client acceptance documents
IV.
Original and revised project plans and schedules (WBS, Gantt charts and network
diagrams, cost estimates, communications management plan, etc.)
V.
Design documents
VI.
Final project report
VII.
Deliverables, as appropriate
VIII.
Audit reports
IX.
Lessons-learned reports
X.
Copies of all status reports, meeting minutes, change notices, and other written
and electronic communications
Table 10-4  Final project documentation items
Project Communications Management
451
diagrams are not listed. Many project teams want to access project information on mobile
devices, so many tools now include this capability.
Figure 10-6 shows an example of using Jira by Atlassian, a popular online tool used
to run an agile project. This screenshot shows some of the reporting charts available,
including a burndown chart, a burnup chart, a sprint report, a cumulative flow diagram,
a velocity chart, and a version report. Brief descriptions of each chart are included in the
figure. Chapter 3 of this text includes more details on creating a burndown chart, and
template in Excel is provided on the Companion website. Consult other references for
more details on these and other charts.
When the project team develops its project communications management plan,
it should determine what templates to use for key documentation. To make it more
convenient to use templates, the organization should make project templates readily
available online. The project team should also understand what types of documents are
expected by top management and customers for each project. For example, if a project
sponsor or customer wants a one-page monthly progress report for a specific project,
but the project team delivers a 20-page report, there are communication problems. In
addition, if particular customers or top managers want specific items to be included in
all final project reports, they should make sure that the project team is aware of those
expectations and modifies templates for those reports to account for the requirements.
Source: Basecamp
Figure 10-5  Basecamp core tools
Chapter 10
452
Using Software To Assist In Project Communications
Many organizations are discovering how valuable project management software can be in
communicating project information across the organization. Project management software
can provide different views of information to help meet various communication needs. For
example, senior managers might only need to see summary screens with colors indicating
the overall health of all projects. Middle managers often want to see the status of
milestones for all of the projects in their area. Project team members often need to see all
project documentation. Often, one of the biggest communication problems on projects is
providing the most recent project plans, Gantt charts, specifications, meeting information,
and change requests to stakeholders in a timely fashion. Most project management
software allows users to insert hyperlinks to other project-related files. In Project 2016,
you can insert a hyperlink from a task or milestone listed in a Gantt chart to another
file that contains relevant information. For example, there might be a milestone that the
project charter was signed. You can insert a hyperlink from the Gantt chart to the Word
file that contains the project charter. You could also link appropriate tasks or milestones
to Excel files that contain a staffing management plan or cost estimate or to Microsoft
Source: Atlassian
Figure 10-6  Jira agile reporting
Project Communications Management
453
PowerPoint files with important presentations or other information. The Project 2016 file
and all associated hyperlinked files could then be placed on a local area network server or
Web server, allowing all project stakeholders easy access to important project information.
(See Appendix A for more information on using Microsoft Project 2016 to assist in project
communications management.)
Even though organizations routinely use many types of hardware and software to
enhance communications, they need to take advantage of new technologies and adjust
existing systems to serve the special communications needs of customers and project
teams. In addition to diverse customer and project needs, they have to address the
changing expectations of consumers and the workforce. For example, several television
shows have harnessed communications technology to engage their audiences by letting
them vote online or via cell phone for their favorite singers, tweet celebrities, or access
information on their websites or Facebook pages. Many people, especially younger people,
use instant messaging or text messages every day to communicate with friends. Some
business and technical professionals also find instant messaging and text messaging to be
useful tools for quickly communicating with colleagues, customers, suppliers, and others.
Blogs are journals on the Web that allow users to write entries, respond to another poster's
comments, create links, upload pictures, and post comments to journal entries. Blogs have
also become popular as a communication technology. If television shows and nontechnical
people can use advanced communications technologies, why can't project stakeholders?
Employers have made changes to meet changing expectations and needs in
communications. On several IT projects, project managers have found that their team
members can be more productive when they are allowed to work from home. Other
project managers have no choice in the matter when some or all of their project team
members work remotely. As you learned in Chapter 9, Project Resource Management,
studies show that providing a quiet work environment and a dedicated workspace
increases programmer productivity. Most people who work from home have well-equipped,
comfortable offices with fewer distractions and more space than corporate offices.
Workers also appreciate the added bonus of avoiding traffic and having more flexible
work schedules. However, it is important to make sure that work is well defined and that
communications are in place to allow remote workers to work effectively.
Several products are available to assist individual consumers and organizations with
communications. Many products were developed or enhanced in recent years to address
the issue of providing fast, convenient, consistent, and up-to-date project information. Many
organizations use SharePoint or similar products for document management and storage
and tools like WebEx or Skype for video conferencing. Screen sharing software like Zoom
and GoTo Meetiing can also improve communications. Webcasts are now a common tool
for presenting video, graphics, sound, voice, and participant feedback live over the Web.
Podcasts and YouTube videos have also become popular tools for providing various types of
audio and video information, from exercise instructions to class lectures. Most working adults
and students have cell phones that they use to take and send pictures or send and receive
text messages or e-mail. Many students text or tweet their friends to plan social activities or
discuss academic topics.
These same technologies can enhance project communications. For even more
powerful and integrated communications, enterprise project management software
provides many workgroup functions that allow a team of people at different locations to
Chapter 10
454
work together on projects and share project information. Workgroup functions allow the
exchange of messages through e-mail, intranet, wireless devices, or the Web. For example,
you can use Project 2016 to alert members about new or changed task assignments,
and members can return status information and notify other workgroup members about
changes in the schedule or other project parameters.
Many project management software products also provide the following tools to
enhance communications:

Portfolio management: By providing a centralized and consolidated view of
programs and projects, the user can evaluate and prioritize activities across
the organization. This feature makes it possible to maximize productivity,
minimize costs, and keep activities aligned with strategic objectives.

Resource management: Maximizing human resources is often the key to
minimizing project costs. This feature enables the user to maximize resource
use across the organization to help plan and manage the workforce effectively.

Project collaboration: Sharing project information is often a haphazard endeavor.
Project collaboration enables an organization to share knowledge immediately
and consistently to improve communications and decision making, eliminate
redundancies, and take advantage of best practices for project management.
Even with all of the technology available, many organizations have problems
communicating on global projects. In addition to the difficulty in finding an acceptable
time for remotely spaced project teams to meet, there are often issues with audio or video
conference calls in trying to understand each other. Teams often have to insert technical
translators into the process when discussing critical requirements so that each side can
fully understand what the other means. This process impedes what most people think of
as a simple situation in which virtual teams should be able to easily work together using
technology across the globe. They can, but only when they share the culture and language.
Some companies have resorted to expending the money to station members of their
staff in the other organization's location to act as translators and promote more effective
and productive communications. Another potential communications problem involves
"follow the sun" project management, in which teams spaced around the globe use their
own business day (eight hours) to perform a segment of the work and then hand it off
to the next in the rotation as their day ends and the next team's day begins. Problems
develop when the handoff communication does not address issues properly, causing the
whole cycle to fail until someone can clarify or correct the problem. While this approach
theoretically can keep teams working on a project around the clock, it can actually idle
the project as well when the communication during the handoff is not effective.
Considerations For Agile/Adaptive Environments
The PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition provides the following information for project
communications management:
Project environments subject to various elements of ambiguity and change have an
inherent need to communicate evolving and emerging details more frequently and
quickly. This motivates streamlining team member access to information, frequent
team checkpoints, and collocating team members as much as possible.
Project Communications Management
455
In addition, posting project artifacts in a transparent fashion, and holding regular
stakeholder reviews are intended to promote communication with management and
stakeholders.10
These considerations are true for all project environments. Communications should
be up to date, easily available, and reviewed regularly with stakeholders. Although it
may be easier for team members to communicate when they are collocated, the reality
is that many projects involve people who do not work in close proximity to each other.
Effectively planning for good project communications and using appropriate technology
become even more important in these situations.
Communication is among the more important factors for success in project
management. While technology can aid in the communications process and be the
easiest aspect of the process to address, it is not the most important. Far more
important is improving an organization's ability to communicate. Improving this
ability often requires a cultural change in an organization that takes a lot of time,
hard work, and patience. IT personnel, in particular, often need special coaching
to improve their communications skills. The project manager's chief role in the
communications process is that of facilitator. Project managers must educate all
stakeholders-management, team members, and customers-on the importance of
good project communications and ensure that the project has a good communications
management plan.
C a s e W r a p - U p
Christine Braun worked closely with Peter Gumpert and his project managers to develop
a communications management plan for all of the fiber-optic undersea telecommunica-
tions projects. Peter was very skilled at running effective meetings, so everyone focused
on meeting specific objectives. Peter emphasized the importance of keeping himself, the
project managers, and other major stakeholders informed about the status of all projects.
He emphasized that the project managers were in charge of their projects, and that he
did not intend to tell them how to do their jobs. He just wanted to have accurate and
consistent information to help coordinate all of the projects and make everyone's jobs
easier. When some of the project managers balked at the additional work of providing
more project information in different formats, Peter openly discussed the issues with
them in more detail. He then authorized each project manager to use additional staff to
help develop and follow standards for all project communications.
Christine used her strong technical and communications skills to create a website
that included samples of important project documents, presentations, and templates for
other people to download and use on their own projects. After determining the need for
more remote communications and collaboration between projects, Christine and other
staff members researched the latest hardware and software products. Peter authorized
funds for a new project led by Christine to evaluate and then purchase smartphones,
apps, and enterprise project management (EPM) software with wiki capability that could
be accessed via the Web. All managers and technical staff, including Peter, received their
own devices, and any project stakeholder could request one and get one-on-one training
for how to use it with the new apps and EPM software.
Chapter 10
456
Chapter Summary
Failure to communicate is often the greatest threat to the success of any project, especially IT
projects. Communication is the oil that keeps a project running smoothly. Project communications
management involves planning communications management, managing communications, and
controlling communications.
Project managers can spend as much as 90 percent of their time on communicating. Several
keys to good communications include focusing on individual and group communication needs,
using formal and informal methods for communicating, providing important information in an
effective and timely manner, setting the stage for communicating bad news, and understanding
communication channels.
A communications management plan of some type should be created for all projects to help
ensure good communications. Contents of this plan will vary based on the needs of the project.
Managing communication includes creating and distributing project information. The various
methods for distributing project information include formal, informal, written, and verbal. It is
important to determine the most appropriate means for distributing different types of project
information. Project managers and their teams should focus on the importance of building
relationships as they communicate project information. As the number of people who need to
communicate increases, the number of communication channels also increases.
Reporting performance involves collecting and disseminating information about how well a
project is moving toward meeting its goals. Project teams can use earned value charts and other
forms of progress information to communicate and assess project performance. Status review
meetings are an important part of communicating, monitoring, and controlling projects.
The main goal of controlling communications is to ensure the optimal flow of information
throughout the entire project life cycle. Project managers and their teams should consider using
facilitators and other experts to provide assistance.
To improve project communications, project managers and their teams must develop their
communication skills. Suggestions for improving project communications include learning how to
run more effective meetings, how to use e-mail, instant messaging, texting, kanban boards, and
collaborative software more effectively, and how to use templates for project communications.
New hardware and software continue to become available to help improve communications.
As more people work remotely, it is important to make sure they have the necessary tools to
be productive. Enterprise project management software provides many features to enhance
communications across the organization.
Be sure to consider how communications management can differ in agile/adaptive environments.
Discussion Questions
1. Think of examples in the media that poke fun at the communications skills of technical
professionals, such as Dilbert or xkcd.com cartoons. How does this satire influence the
industry and educational programs?
2. What courses in your educational program address the development of communications
skills? What skills do you think employers are looking for? Do you think there should be
more emphasis on communications skills in your degree program?
Project Communications Management
457
3. Discuss the importance of understanding tone of voice and body language in
comprehending the meaning of what people say. Give examples of how the same words
said in different ways have totally different meanings.
4. What items should a communications management plan address? How can a stakeholder
analysis assist in preparing and implementing parts of this plan?
5. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of different ways of distributing project
information.
6. What are some of the ways to create and distribute project performance information?
7. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of telecommuting.
8. Explain why you agree or disagree with some of the suggestions in this chapter for
improving project communications, such as creating a communications management plan,
stakeholder analysis, or performance reports. What other suggestions do you have?
9. How can software assist in project communications? How can it hurt project
communications?
Quick Quiz
1. What do many experts agree is the greatest threat to the success of any project?
a.
Lack of proper funding
b.
A failure to communicate
c.
Poor listening skills
d.
Inadequate staffing
2. In face-to-face interactions, how is most information conveyed?
a.
By the tone of voice
b.
By the words spoken
c.
By body language
d.
By the location
3. Which of the following is not a process in project communications management?
a.
Planning communications management
b.
Controlling communications
c.
Managing communications
d.
Managing stakeholders
4. What strategy can a project manager use to deliver bad news?
a.
Tell a joke first.
b.
Tell senior management as soon as possible so they can develop alternatives and
recommendations.
c.
Ask the project champion to deliver the news.
d.
Set the stage by putting the news into context, emphasizing the impact on the
bottom line.
Chapter 10
458
5. If you add three more people to a project team of five, how many more communication
channels will you add?
a.
2
b.
12
c.
15
d.
18
6. A(n) ____________ report describes where a project stands at a specific point in time.
a.
status
b.
performance
c.
version
d.
earned value
7. What term describes information that is sent to recipients at their request via websites,
bulletin boards, e-learning, knowledge repositories like blogs, and other means?
a.
Push communications
b.
Pull communications
c.
Interactive communications
d.
Customer communications
8. Which of the following is not a recommendation for improving project communications?
a.
You cannot overcommunicate.
b.
Project managers and their teams should take time to develop their communications
skills.
c.
Do not use facilitators or experts outside of the project team to communicate important
information.
d.
Use templates to help prepare project documents.
9. Which of the following is not a guideline to help improve time spent at meetings?
a.
Determine if a meeting can be avoided.
b.
Invite extra people who support your project to make the meeting run more smoothly.
c.
Define the purpose and intended outcome of the meeting.
d.
Build relationships.
10. A ____________ report is a reflective statement that documents important information
learned from working on the project.
a.
kanban
b.
lessons-learned
c.
project archive
d.
progress
Project Communications Management
459
Quick Quiz Answers
1. b; 2. c; 3. d; 4. d; 5. d; 6. a; 7. b; 8. c; 9. b; 10. b
Exercises
1. Research the topic of understanding body language. What are some common body
movements that can help you understand how people are really feeling? What does it mean
if someone looks up a lot when talking versus looking down or side to side? What does it
mean when people cross their arms, touch their noses, or make other common gestures
with their bodies? Perform a role-play of common project scenarios, and have people take
turns saying something that does not match their body language. For example, someone
might say that work is going well on a particular task when it is not.
2. Find examples of how project teams use new technologies to communicate project
information. Which technologies seem to be most effective? Document your findings in a
short paper, citing at least three references.
3. Review the following scenarios, and then write a paragraph for each one describing
what media you think would be most appropriate to use and why. See Table 10-2 for
suggestions.
a. Many of the technical staff on the project arrive at work from 9:30 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
while the business users always arrive before 9:00 a.m. The business users have been
making comments. The project manager wants to have the technical people come in by
9:00, although many of them leave late.
b. Your company is bidding on a project for the entertainment industry. You know that you
need new ideas on how to put together the proposal and communicate your approach in
a way that will impress the customer.
c. Your business has been growing successfully, but you are becoming inundated with
phone calls and e-mails asking similar types of questions.
d. You need to make a general announcement to a large group of people and you want to
make sure they receive the information.
4. How many different communication channels does a project team with six people have?
How many more communication channels would there be if the team grew to 10 people?
5. Review the templates for various project documents provided in this chapter. Pick one
of them and apply it to a project of your choice. Make suggestions for improving the
template.
6. Assume that in an agile project sprint, task T1 has already been completed. Ted is working
on task T2, and tasks T4, T5, and T6 have not yet been assigned for anyone to work on.
Create a kanban board depicting the status of all these activities. You can draw the kanban
board or use the software of your choice.
Chapter 10
460
7. Use the following data to answer the questions that follow.
Sprint Day
Remaining effort (story points)
1
75
2
55
3
45
4
0
5
0
6
0
7
0
8
0
Average velocity 5 (Remaining effort Day 1 2 Remaining effort Current Day)/
(Current Day 2 Day 1)
Estimated completion date 5 Current Day 1 (Remaining effort/Average velocity)
a. Create a burndown chart for the given data using Excel or the software of your choice.
(Hint: You can just create a line or column chart showing the Days on the horizontal axis
and Remaining effort on the vertical axis. You do not need to show Ideal velocity.)
b. What is the average velocity for the project, in story points per day? (Assume the Current
Day is Day 3).
c. What is the project's expected completion date?
8. Write a lessons-learned report for a project of your choice, using the template provided on
the Companion website and the sample in Chapter 3 as guides. Role play presenting the
lessons-learned report, assigning roles of the project manager, project sponsor, etc. Do you
think it is important for all project managers and team members to write lessons-learned
reports? Would you take the time to read them if they were available in your organization?
Why or why not?
9. Research new software products that assist in communications management for large
projects. Write a short paper summarizing your findings. Include websites for software
vendors and your opinion of some of the products.
Running Case
Part 7: Project Communications Management
Several issues have arisen on the Global Treps Project. Ashok, your team member in India,
broke his wrist playing tennis yesterday and cannot work on the project at all for three weeks.
His work, which involves helping to edit the videos, starts in one week, so you need to
reassign it to others.
Project Communications Management
461
Bobby suggests you use kanban boards to list all of the tasks for editing the videos and to
track where they are in the work flow. Bobby, a techie and not known for being a good communi-
cator, is the only person who's ever used kanban boards. You have not yet broken down the tasks
into much detail and need more information from Angela, the contractor in charge of creating the
videos.
Alfreda is having difficulties communicating with her main contact in Ethiopia, Dr. B.
He is very busy all the time and does not use texting, Alfreda's preferred communica-
tions medium. He has also not communicated key information with students who could be
candidates for their event, which is only a month away. Alfreda is not sure if he booked a
room for the event yet.
1. Describe how you would communicate to Ashok and the rest of the team about Ashok's
injury. What actions would you take? What communications medium would you use with
different stakeholders?
2. Prepare a partial communications management plan to address some of the challenges
mentioned in Part 7 of the case.
3. Research free online tools for using kanban boards and choose one to use. Prepare a list
of at least 10 tasks that would be done in editing the videos and enter them into your tool of
choice. Prepare or find a short guide or video explaining how to use the kanban boards.
4. Write a one-page paper describing options for communicating with Dr. B. and making sure
students at his university get information about your event.
Key Terms
blogs
communications management plan
forecasts
Google Docs
lessons-learned report
progress reports
project archives
SharePoint portal
status reports
wiki
Endnotes

1 Janet L. Bailey, Non-Technical Skills for Success in a Technical World, International Journal
of Business and Social Science, Vol. 5, No. 4 Special Issue (March 2014).

2 Frederick P. Brooks, The Mythical Man-Month, second edition (Boston:
Addison-Wesley,1995).

3 Albert Mehrabian, Silent Messages: Implicit Communication of Emotions and Attitudes,
second edition (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 1981).

4 Carol Hildenbrand, "Loud and Clear," CIO Magazine (April 15, 1996).

5 NTT Communications, "Great East Japan Earthquake: Shinsai Recovery in Numbers,"
NTTCOM.TV (March 13, 2012).
Chapter 10
462

6 Adele Peters, "In a Disaster, This Device Lets People Communicate Without a Cell Signal,
Wi-Fi, or Power," Co.Exist, Fast Company (April 30, 2015).

7 "New Research Reveals Collaboration Is a Key Driver of Business Performance Around
the World: Verizon Business, Microsoft sponsor international study; create first-of-its-kind
collaboration index to measure impact of communications culture, technologies," Microsoft
Press Pass (June 5, 2006).

8 Frost & Sullivan, "Meetings Around the World II: Charting the Course of Advanced
Collaboration" (October 14, 2009).

9 Susie Poppick, "10 Social Media Blunders That Cost a Millennial a Job-or Worse," Money,
http://time.com/money/3019899/10-facebook-twitter-mistakes-lost-job-millennials-viral/
(September 5, 2014).

10 Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of
Knowledge (PMBOK Guide) - Sixth Edition (2017), p. 365.
L e a r n i n g O b j e c t i v e s
After reading this chapter, you will be able to:

Explain the concept of risk as it relates to project management, and list
the advantages of managing project risks according to best practices

Discuss the elements of planning risk management and the contents of a
risk management plan

List common sources of risks on information technology (IT) projects

Describe the process of identifying risks and create a risk register and
risk report

Discuss qualitative risk analysis and explain how to calculate risk factors,
create probability/impact matrixes, and apply the Top Ten Risk Item
Tracking technique to rank risks

Explain quantitative risk analysis and how to apply decision trees,
simulation, and sensitivity analysis to quantify risks

Provide examples of using different risk response planning strategies to
address both negative and positive risks

Discuss how to monitor risks

Describe how software can assist in project risk management

Discuss considerations for agile/adaptive environments
C h a p t e r 11
Project Risk Management
Chapter 11
464
The Importance of Project Risk Management
Project risk management is the art and science of identifying, analyzing, and responding to
risk throughout the life of a project and in the best interests of meeting project objectives.
A frequently overlooked aspect of project management, risk management can often result
in significant improvements in the ultimate success of projects. Risk management can
have a positive impact on selecting projects, determining their scope, and developing
realistic schedules and cost estimates. It helps project stakeholders understand the nature
of the project, involves team members in defining strengths and weaknesses, and helps to
integrate the other project management knowledge areas.
Good project risk management often goes unnoticed, unlike crisis management,
which indicates an obvious danger to the success of a project. The crisis, in turn,
receives the intense interest of the entire project team. Resolving a crisis has much
greater visibility, often accompanied by rewards from management, than successful risk
management. In contrast, when risk management is effective, it results in fewer problems,
and for the few problems that exist, it results in more expeditious resolutions. It may be
difficult for outside observers to tell whether risk management or luck was responsible
for the smooth development of a new system, but project teams always know that their
projects worked out better because of good risk management. Managing project risks takes
dedicated, talented professionals. In response to this need, PMI introduced the PMI Risk
O p e n i n g C a s e
Cliff Branch was the president of a small IT consulting firm that specialized in developing
Internet and mobile applications and providing full-service support. The staff consisted of
programmers, business analysts, database specialists, Web designers, project managers,
and others. The firm had 50 full-time people and planned to hire at least 10 more in the
next year. The firm also planned to increase the number of part-time consultants it used.
The company had done very well during the past few years, but it was recently having
difficulty winning contracts. Spending time and resources to respond to various requests
for proposals from prospective clients was becoming expensive. Many clients were
starting to require presentations and even some prototype development before awarding
a contract.
Cliff knew he had an aggressive approach to risk and liked to bid on the projects
with the highest payoff. He did not use a systematic approach to evaluate the risks
involved in various projects before bidding on them. He focused on the profit potentials
and on how challenging the projects were. His strategy was now causing problems for the
company because it was investing heavily in the preparation of proposals, yet winning
few contracts. Several employees who were not currently working on projects were still
on the payroll, and some of their part-time consultants were actively pursuing other
opportunities because they were being underutilized. What could Cliff and his company
do to better understand project risks? Should Cliff adjust his strategy for deciding what
projects to pursue? How?
Project Risk Management
465
Management Professional (PMI-RMP)SM credential in 2008. (Consult PMI's website for
further information.)
All industries, especially the software development industry, tend to underestimate
the importance of project risk management. William Ibbs and Young H. Kwak studied
project management maturity in 38 organizations in different industries. The
organizations were divided into four industry groups: engineering and construction,
telecommunications, information systems/software development, and high-tech
manufacturing. Survey participants answered 148 multiple-choice questions to
assess how mature their organization was in the project management knowledge
areas of scope, time, cost, quality, human resources, communications, risk, and
procurement. The rating scale ranged from 1 to 5, with 5 being the highest maturity
rating. Table 11-1 shows the results of the survey. Notice that risk management was
the only knowledge area for which all ratings were less than 3. This study showed
that all organizations should put more effort into project risk management, especially
companies in the information systems and software development industry, which had
the lowest rating of 2.75.1
A similar survey was completed with software development companies in Mauritius,
South Africa. The average maturity rating was only 2.29 for all knowledge areas on a scale
of 1 to 5, with 5 being the highest maturity rating. The lowest average maturity rating,
1.84, was also in the area of project risk management, like the study by Ibbs and Kwak.
Cost management had the highest maturity rating of 2.5, and the survey authors noted
that organizations in the study were often concerned with cost overruns and had metrics
KEY: 1
Lowest maturity rating
5
, 5
highest maturity rating
5
Knowledge
Area
Engineering/
Construction
Telecommunications
Information
Systems
High-Tech
Manufacturing
Scope
3.52
3.45
3.25
3.37
Time
3.55
3.41
3.03
3.50
Cost
3.74
3.22
3.20
3.97
Quality
2.91
3.22
2.88
3.26
Human
resources
3.18
3.20
2.93
3.18
Communications
3.53
3.53
3.21
3.48
Risk
2.93
2.87
2.75
2.76
Procurement
3.33
3.01
2.91
3.33
Source: Ibbs and Kwak
Table 11-1  Project management maturity by industry group and knowledge area
Chapter 11
466
in place to help control costs. The authors also found that maturity rating was closely
linked to the success rate of projects, and that the poor rating for risk management was a
likely cause of project problems and failures.2
KLCI Research Group surveyed 260 software organizations worldwide to study software
risk management practices. The following points summarize some of their findings:

Ninety-seven percent of the participants said they had procedures in place to
identify and assess risk.

Eighty percent identified anticipating and avoiding problems as the primary
benefit of risk management.

Seventy percent of the organizations had defined software development
processes.

Sixty-four percent had a Project Management Office.
Figure 11-1 shows the main benefits from software risk management practices
cited by survey respondents. In addition to anticipating and avoiding problems, risk
management practices helped software project managers prevent surprises, improve
negotiations, meet customer commitments, and reduce schedule slips and cost overruns.3
Although many organizations know that they do not do a good job of managing
project risk, little progress seems to have been made over the past decade in improving
Source: Kulik and Weber, KLCI Research Group
Figure 11-1  Benefits from software risk management practices
Anticipate/avoid problems
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Prevent surprises
Improve ability to negotiate
Meet customer commitments
Reduce schedule slips
Reduce cost overruns
None
80%
60%
47%
47%
43%
6%
% of Survey Respondents
35%
Project Risk Management
467
risk management on a project level or an enterprise level. Several books and
articles have been written on the topic. For example shortly after the fall 2008 stock
market crash, Dr. David Hillson, PMP, wrote about the importance of project risk
management. Hillson said:
There is no doubt that all sectors of industry and society are facing real challenges
in coping with the current fallout from the credit crunch. But risk management
should not be regarded as a nonessential cost to be cut in these difficult times.
Instead, organisations should use the insights offered by the risk process to ensure
that they can handle the inevitable uncertainties and emerge in the best possible
position in [the] future. With high levels of volatility surrounding us on all sides, risk
management is more needed now than ever, and cutting it would be a false economy.
Rather than treating risk management as part of the problem, we should see it as a
major part of the solution.4
Hillson continues to write articles and books, give presentations, and provide videos
on his website at www.risk-doctor.com.
G l o b a l I s s u e s
Many people around the world suffered losses as various financial markets dropped in
the fall of 2008, even after the $700 billion economic stabilization act was passed by
the U.S. Congress. According to a survey of 316 global financial services executives
conducted in July 2008, over 70 percent of respondents believed that the losses during
the financial crisis were largely due to failures to address risk management issues. The
executives identified several challenges in implementing risk management, including
data and company culture issues. For example, access to relevant, timely, and consistent
data continues to be a major obstacle in many organizations. Many respondents also said
that fostering a culture of risk management was a major challenge.
Executives and lawmakers finally started paying attention to risk management.
Fifty-nine percent of survey respondents said the financial crisis prompted them to
scrutinize their risk management practices in greater detail, and many institutions are
revisiting their risk management practices. The Financial Stability Forum (FSF) and the
Institute for International Finance (IIF) called for closer scrutiny of the risk management
process.5
Risk continues to be an important issue in the financial industry, and organizations
are taking a more proactive approach by investing in IT such as cloud computing, big
data, and analytics to help them identify and mitigate risk. "Worldwide, the capital mar-
kets, banking and insurance sectors will spend roughly $78.6 billion on risk information
technologies and services (RITS) in 2015, according to a new study. What's more, that
figure is expected to grow to $96.3 billion by 2018."6
Before you can improve project risk management, you must understand what risk
is. A basic dictionary definition states that risk is "the possibility of loss or injury."
This definition highlights the negativity often associated with risk and points out that
Chapter 11
468
uncertainty is involved. Project risk management involves understanding potential
problems that might occur on the project and how they might impede project success.
The PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition refers to this type of risk as a negative risk or threat.
However, there are also positive risks or opportunities, which can result in good outcomes
for a project. A general definition of a project risk, therefore, is an uncertainty that can
have a negative or positive effect on meeting project objectives.
Managing negative risks involves a number of possible actions that project
managers can take to avoid, lessen, change, or accept the potential effects of risks
on their projects. Positive risk management is like investing in opportunities. It is
important to note that risk management is an investment-costs are associated with it.
The investment that an organization is willing to make in risk management activities
depends on the nature of the project, the experience of the project team, and the
constraints imposed on both. In any case, the cost for risk management should not
exceed the potential benefits.
If there is so much risk in IT projects, why do organizations pursue them? Many
companies are in business today because they took risks that created great opportunities.
Organizations survive over the long term when they pursue opportunities. IT is often a
key part of a business's strategy; without it, many businesses might not survive. Given
that all projects involve uncertainties that can have negative or positive outcomes, the
question is how to decide which projects to pursue and how to identify and manage
project risk throughout a project's life cycle.
B e s t P r a c t i c e
Some organizations make the mistake of addressing only tactical and negative risks when
performing project risk management. David Hillson (www.risk-doctor.com) suggests
overcoming this problem by widening the scope of risk management to encompass
both strategic risks and upside opportunities, which he refers to as integrated risk
management. Benefits of this approach include:

Bridging the strategy and tactics gap to ensure that project delivery is tied to
organizational needs and vision

Focusing projects on the benefits they exist to support, rather than producing
a set of deliverables

Managing opportunities proactively as an integral part of business processes at
both strategic and tactical levels

Providing useful information to decision makers at all levels when the
environment is uncertain

Allowing an appropriate level of risk to be taken intelligently with full
awareness of the degree of uncertainty and its potential effects on objectives7
In a 2014 paper, Hilson also described the importance of good working relationships
as a best practice in managing project risk. ". . . management of overall project
risk becomes a shared duty of both project sponsor and project manager, acting in
(continued)
Project Risk Management
469
Several risk experts suggest that organizations and individuals should strive to find
a balance between risks and opportunities in all aspects of projects and their personal
lives. The idea of striving for balance suggests that different organizations and people have
different attitudes toward risk. Some organizations or people have a neutral tolerance for
risk, some have an aversion to risk, and others are risk-seeking. These three preferences are
part of the utility theory of risk.
Risk utility is the amount of satisfaction or pleasure received from a potential
payoff. Figure 11-2 shows the basic difference between risk-averse, risk-neutral, and
risk-seeking preferences. The y-axis represents utility, or the amount of pleasure
received from taking a risk. The x-axis shows the amount of potential payoff or dollar
value of the opportunity at stake. Utility rises at a decreasing rate for a risk-averse
person or organization. In other words, when more payoff or money is at stake, a
person or organization that is risk-averse gains less satisfaction from the risk, or has
lower tolerance for the risk. Those who are risk-seeking have a higher tolerance for
risk, and their satisfaction increases when more payoff is at stake. A risk-seeking
person or organization prefers outcomes that are more uncertain and is often willing
to pay a penalty to take risks. A risk-neutral person or organization achieves a balance
between risk and payoff. For example, a risk-averse organization might not purchase
hardware from a vendor who has not been in business for a specified period of time.
A risk-seeking organization might deliberately choose start-up vendors for hardware
purchases to gain new products with unusual features that provide an advantage.
A risk-neutral organization might perform a series of analyses to evaluate possible
purchase decisions. This type of organization evaluates decisions using a number of
factors-risk is just one of them.
Figure 11-2  Risk utility function and risk preference
utility
potential payoff
utility
potential payoff
utility
potential payoff
Risk-Averse
Risk-Neutral
Risk-Seeking
partnership to ensure that the project has the optimal chance of achieving its objectives
within the allowable risk threshold. Successful management of risk at this whole-project
level therefore depends largely on the effectiveness of the working relationship between
these two key players."8
Chapter 11
470
The goal of project risk management can be viewed as minimizing potential negative
risks while maximizing potential positive risks. The term known risks is sometimes used
to describe risks that the project team has identified and analyzed. Known risks can be
managed proactively. However, unknown risks, or risks that have not been identified and
analyzed, cannot be managed.
As you can imagine, good project managers know it is good practice to take the
time to identify and manage project risks. Six major processes are involved in risk
management:
1. Planning risk management involves deciding how to approach and plan risk
management activities for the project. The main output of this process is a
risk management plan.
2. Identifying risks involves determining which risks are likely to affect a
project and documenting the characteristics of each. The main outputs of
this process are a risk register, risk report, and project documents updates.
3. Performing qualitative risk analysis involves prioritizing risks based on
their probability of occurrence and impact. After identifying risks, project
teams can use various tools and techniques to rank risks and update
information in the risk register. The main outputs are project documents
updates.
4. Performing quantitative risk analysis involves numerically estimating the
effects of risks on project objectives. The main outputs of this process are
project documents updates.
5. Planning risk responses involves taking steps to enhance opportunities and
reduce threats to meeting project objectives. Using outputs from the preced-
ing risk management processes, project teams can develop risk response
strategies that often result in change requests, updates to the project man-
agement plan and project documents.
A d v i c e f o r Y o u n g P r o f e s s i o n a l s
Young project professionals are sometimes more willing to take risks with unique or
untested approaches than their more experienced counterparts. Project teams with
less experience often believe that they can accomplish more than they are realistically
able to do within a certain time period, or they might convince each other that appar-
ent risks are not as much of a concern as they really should be. They may also fail to
take into account some details of costs or quality that a more experienced person might
include because they have not seen how such factors can be affected by unlikely events
that actually happen. Years of experience in managing projects tends to build a sense of
awareness or second nature about risk. So, take the time to find out what other, more
experienced people might feel about the circumstances of a project before making up
your mind about potential risks. Then, taking other views into account, you can deter-
mine how best to plan for the impacts that might occur while balancing the rewards of a
potential payoff from a unique or untested approach.
Project Risk Management
471
6. Implementing risk responses, just as it sounds, involves implementing the
risk response plans. Outputs include change requests and project documents
updates.
7.
Monitoring risk involves monitoring identified and residual risks, identifying
new risks, carrying out risk response plans, and evaluating the effectiveness of
risk strategies throughout the life of the project. The main outputs of this process
include work performance information, change requests, and updates to the
project management plan, project documents, and organizational process assets.
Figure 11-3 summarizes the inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of project risk
management.
Source: PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition. Project Management Institute, Inc. (2017). Copyright
and all rights reserved. Material from this publication has been reproduced with permission
of PMI.
Figure 11-3  Project risk management overview
11.1 Plan Risk
Management
11.5 Plan
Risk Responses
11.6 Implement Risk
Responses
11.7 Monitor Risks
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Work performance data
.4 Work performance reports
.2. Tools & Techniques
.1 Data analysis
.2 Audits
.3 Meetings
.3. Outputs
.1 Work performance
information
.2 Change requests
.3 Project management plan
updates
.4 Project documents updates
.5 Organizational process
assets updates
11.2 Identify Risks
11.3 Perform Qualitative
Risk Analysis
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Agreements
.4 Procurement
documentation
.5 Enterprise environmental
factors
.6 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Data gathering
.3 Data analysis
.4 Interpersonal and team
skills
.5 Prompt lists
.6 Meetings
.3 Outputs
.1 Risk register
.2 Risk report
.3 Project documents updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Enterprise environmental
factors
.4 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Data gathering
.3 Data analysis
.4 Interpersonal and team
skills
.5 Risk categorization
.6 Data representation
.7 Meetings
.3 Outputs
.1 Project documents updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Enterprise environmental
factors
.4 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Data gathering
.3 Interpersonal and team
skills
.4 Representations of
uncertainty
.5 Data analysis
.3. Outputs
.1 Project documents updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Interpersonal and team
skills
.3 Project management
information system
.3 Outputs
.1 Change requests
.2 Project documents updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Enterprise environmental
factors
.4 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Data gathering
.3 Interpersonal and team
skills
.4 Strategies for threats
.5 Strategies for
opportunities
.6 Contingent response
strategies
.7 Strategies for overall
project risk
.8 Data analysis
.9 Decision making
.3 Outputs
.1 Change requests
.2 Project management plan
updates
.3 Project documents updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project charter
.2 Project management plan
.3 Project documents
.4 Enterprise environmental
factors
.5 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Data analysis
.3 Meetings
.3 Outputs
.1 Risk management plan
11.4 Perform Quantitative
Risk Analysis
Project Risk
Management Overview
Chapter 11
472
The first step in project risk management is determining how to address this knowledge
area for a particular project by performing risk management planning.
Planning Risk Management
Planning risk management is the process of deciding how to approach risk management
activities and plan for them in a project; the main output of this process is a risk
management plan. A risk management plan documents the procedures for managing risk
throughout the project. Project teams should hold several planning meetings early in the
project's life cycle to help develop the risk management plan. The project team should
review project documents as well as corporate risk management policies, risk categories,
lessons-learned reports from past projects, and templates for creating a risk management
plan. It is also important to review the risk tolerances of various stakeholders. For
example, if the project sponsor is risk-averse, the project might require a different
approach to risk management than if the project sponsor were a risk seeker.
A risk management plan summarizes how risk management will be performed on
a particular project. Like plans for other knowledge areas, it becomes a subset of the
project management plan. Table 11-2 lists the general topics that a risk management
plan should address. It is important to clarify roles and responsibilities, prepare
budget and schedule estimates for risk-related work, and identify risk categories for
consideration. It is also important to describe how risk management will be done,
including assessment of risk probabilities and impacts as well as the creation of risk-
related documentation. The level of detail included in the risk management plan can
vary with the needs of the project.
In addition to a risk management plan, many projects also include contingency plans,
fallback plans, contingency reserves, and management reserves.

Contingency plans are predefined actions that the project team will take if
an identified risk event occurs. For example, if the project team knows that
a new release of a software package may not be available in time to use for
the project, the team might have a contingency plan to use the existing, older
version of the software.

Fallback plans are developed for risks that have a high impact on meeting
project objectives and are put into effect if attempts to reduce the risk do
not work. For example, a new college graduate might have a main plan
and several contingency plans for where to live after graduation, but if
these plans do not work out, a fallback plan might be to live at home for a
while. Sometimes the terms contingency plan and fallback plan are used
interchangeably.

Contingency reserves or contingency allowances are funds included in
the cost baseline that can be used to mitigate cost or schedule overruns
if known risks occur. For example, if a project appears to be off course
because the staff is not experienced with a new technology and the team
had identified that as a risk, the contingency reserves could be used to hire
Project Risk Management
473
an outside consultant to train and advise the project staff in using the new
technology.

Management reserves are funds held for unknown risks that are used for
management control purposes. They are not part of the cost baseline, as
discussed in Chapter 7, but they are part of the project budget and funding
requirements. If the management reserves are used for unforeseen work, they
are added to the cost baseline after the change is approved.
Contingency plans, fallback plans, and reserves show the importance of taking a
proactive approach to managing project risks.
Before you can really understand and use project risk management processes on IT
projects, it is necessary to recognize and understand the common sources of risk.
Topic
Questions to Answer
Methodology
How will risk management be performed on this project?
What tools and data sources are available and applicable?
Roles and responsibilities
Which people are responsible for implementing spe-
cific tasks and providing deliverables related to risk
management?
Budget and schedule
What are the estimated costs and schedules for performing
risk-related activities?
Risk categories
What are the main categories of risks that should be
addressed on this project? Is there a risk breakdown
structure for the project? (See the information on risk
breakdown structures later in this chapter.)
Risk probability and
impact
How will the probabilities and impacts of risk items be
assessed? What scoring and interpretation methods will
be used for the qualitative and quantitative analysis of
risks? How will the probability and impact matrix be
developed?
Revised stakeholders'
tolerances
Have stakeholders' tolerances for risk changed? How will
those changes affect the project?
Tracking
How will the team track risk management activities? How
will lessons learned be documented and shared? How will
risk management processes be audited?
Risk documentation
What reporting formats and processes will be used for risk
management activities?
Table 11-2  Topics addressed in a risk management plan
Chapter 11
474
Common Sources of Risk on IT Projects
Several studies have shown that IT projects share some common sources of risk. For
example, recall from Chapter 1 the factors of success from the Standish Group. The
top four factors were executive sponsorship, emotional maturity, user involvement, and
optimization, all with equal scores of 15. If a potential project does not receive a minimum
score on any of these factors, the organization might decide not to work on it or to reduce
the risks before investing too much time or money.9
Many organizations develop their own risk questionnaires. Broad categories of risks
described on these questionnaires might include the following:

Market risk: If the IT project will create a new product or service, will it be
useful to the organization or marketable to others? Will users accept and use
the product or service? Will someone else create a better product or service
faster, making the project a waste of time and money?

Financial risk: Can the organization afford to undertake the project? How
confident are stakeholders in the financial projections? Will the project
meet NPV, ROI, and payback estimates? If not, can the organization afford
to continue the project? Is this project the best way to use the organization's
financial resources?

Technology risk: Is the project technically feasible? Will it use mature,
leading-edge, or bleeding-edge technologies? When will decisions be made
on which technology to use? Will hardware, software, and networks function
properly? Will the technology be available in time to meet project objectives?
Could the technology be obsolete before a useful product can be created? You
can also break down the technology risk category into hardware, software,
and network technology, if desired.

People risk: Does the organization have people with appropriate skills to
complete the project successfully? If not, can the organization find such people?
Do people have the proper managerial and technical skills? Do they have enough
experience? Does senior management support the project? Is there a project
champion? Is the organization familiar with the sponsor or customer for the
project? How good is the relationship with the sponsor or customer?

Structure/process risk: What degree of change will the new project introduce
into user areas and business procedures? How many distinct user groups
does the project need to satisfy? With how many other systems does the new
project or system need to interact? Does the organization have processes in
place to complete the project successfully?
Reviewing a proposed project in terms of the Standish Group's factors of success, a
risk questionnaire, or another similar tool is a good method for understanding common
sources of risk on IT projects. It is also useful to review the work breakdown structure
(WBS) for a project to see if there might be specific risks by WBS categories. For example,
if an item on the WBS involves preparing a press release and no one on the project team
has ever written one, it could be a negative risk if the release is not handled professionally.
A risk breakdown structure is a useful tool to help project managers consider potential
risks in different categories. Similar in form to a WBS, a risk breakdown structure is a
Project Risk Management
475
hierarchy of potential risk categories for a project. Figure 11-4 shows a sample risk breakdown
structure that might apply to many IT projects. The highest-level categories are business,
technical, organizational, and project management. Competitors, suppliers, and cash flow are
categories that fall under business risks. Under technical risks are the categories of hardware,
software, and network. Hardware could be broken down further to include malfunctions,
availability, and cost. Notice how the risk breakdown structure provides a simple, one-page
chart to help ensure that a project team considers important risk categories related to all
IT projects. For example, Cliff and his managers in the chapter's opening case could have
benefited from considering several of the categories listed under project management-
estimates, communication, and resources. They could have discussed these risks and other
types of risks related to the projects their company bid on, and then developed appropriate
strategies for optimizing positive risks and minimizing negative ones.
In addition to identifying risk based on the nature of the project or products created,
it is also important to identify potential risks according to project management knowledge
areas, such as scope, time, cost, and quality. Notice that a major category in the risk
breakdown structure in Figure 11-4 is project management. Table 11-3 lists potential
negative risk conditions that can exist within each knowledge area.13
Understanding common sources of risk is very helpful in risk identification, which is
the next step in project risk management.
W h a t W e n t W r o n g ?
Performing risk management is important to improving the likelihood of project success.
But in 1995, more than half of projects with significant cost or schedule overruns had no
risk management in place, according to a study conducted by KPMG, a large consulting
firm.10 Nearly 20 years later, the situation was much the same. In a 2013 KPMG survey
of over 1,000 executives, although risk management was a high priority, only 66 percent
of companies said they often or constantly build it into their strategic planning deci-
sions. A key observation in the survey report is that "Risk management is at the top of
the global executive agenda . . . those companies that fail to manage them well imperil
their future."11 Only 44 percent of executives believed their organizations were effective
at developing stakeholders' understanding of risk. The executives also said challenges
are growing faster than they can handle them. The top three risks reported were growing
regulatory pressure from governments, reputational risk, and market risk.
Airline incidents cause concerns, especially when lives are lost. The Germanwings
crash in 2015 resulted in 150 deaths, allegedly due to the co-pilot's poor mental state.
Senior managers are reviewing policies related to risk management to help prevent
future tragedies. Some changes can take place immediately, while others will take more
time. For example, the German air traffic control authority suggested investing in new
technologies like remote command of passenger planes, an approach that will take a fair
amount of time and money to implement. Other policy changes have already been made.
"Since the Germanwings crash, European airlines have implemented a rule that two
people must be in the cockpit at all times and Germany has set up a task force with the
aviation industry to consider changes to medical and psychological tests for pilots."12
Chapter 11
476
Figure 11-4  Sample risk breakdown structure
IT Project
Technical
Organizational
Project
Management
Business
Cash ﬂow
Suppliers
Competitors
Network
Team support
Resources
User support
Executive
support
Software
Hardware
Communication
Estimates
Knowledge Area
Risk Conditions
Integration
Inadequate planning; poor resource allocation; poor integration
management; lack of post-project review
Scope
Poor definition of scope or work packages; incomplete definition
Time
Errors in estimating time or resource availability; errors in deter-
mining the critical path; poor allocation and management of float;
early release of competitive products
Cost
Estimating errors; inadequate productivity, cost, change, or
contingency
Quality
Poor attitude toward quality; substandard design, materials, and
workmanship; inadequate quality assurance program
Human resource
Poor conflict management; poor project organization and defini-
tion of responsibilities; absence of leadership
Communications
Carelessness in planning or communicating
Risk
Ignoring risk; unclear analysis of risk; poor insurance management
Procurement
Unenforceable conditions or contract clauses; adversarial relations
Stakeholders
Lack of consultation with key stakeholder; poor sponsor
engagement
Source: R.M. Wideman
Table 11-3  Potential negative risk conditions associated with each knowledge area
Project Risk Management
477
Identifying Risks
Identifying risks is the process of understanding what potential events might hurt or
enhance a particular project. It is important to identify potential risks early, but you must
also continue to identify risks based on the changing project environment. Also remember
that you cannot manage risks if you do not identify them first. By understanding
common sources of risks and reviewing a project's project management plan, project
documents, agreements, procurement documents, enterprise environmental factors,
and organizational process assets project managers and their teams can identify many
potential risks.
Another consideration for identifying risks is the likelihood of advanced discovery,
which is often viewed at a program level rather than a project level. The Department of
Defense (DOD) Risk, Issue, and Opportunity Management Guide addresses this concept
and emphasizes the need to establish high-level indicators for an entire program. For
example, several experts track asteroids to enable a response in case one threatens our
planet. Although the likelihood of a deadly asteroid is very low, the impact is extremely
high. For IT programs, advanced discovery could involve monitoring an important supplier
who might remove support for software used on several projects. Some suppliers provide
early warning for this possibility, while others do not. It is important for organizations to
identify these advanced discovery risks early and track their status in case time is needed
to develop responses.
Suggestions for Identifying Risks
There are several tools and techniques for identifying risks. Project teams often begin
this process by reviewing project documentation, recent and historical information
related to the organization, and assumptions that might affect the project. Project
team members and outside experts often hold meetings to discuss this information and
ask important questions about it as they relate to risk. After identifying potential risks
at the initial meeting, the project team might then use different information-gathering
techniques to further identify risks. Some common techniques include brainstorming,
the Delphi technique, interviewing, root cause analysis, and SWOT analysis.
Brainstorming is a technique by which a group attempts to generate ideas or find a
solution for a specific problem by amassing ideas spontaneously and without judgment.
This approach can help the group create a comprehensive list of risks to address later
during qualitative and quantitative risk analysis. An experienced facilitator should run the
brainstorming session and introduce new categories of potential risks to keep the ideas
flowing. After the ideas are collected, the facilitator can group and categorize the ideas
to make them more manageable. Care must be taken, however, not to overuse or misuse
brainstorming. Although businesses use brainstorming widely to generate new ideas, the
psychology literature shows that individual people working alone produce a greater number
of ideas than they produce through brainstorming in small, face-to-face groups. Group effects,
such as fear of social disapproval, the effects of authority hierarchy, and domination of the
session by one or two vocal people, often inhibit idea generation for many participants.14
The Delphi technique is an approach to gathering information that helps prevent
some of the negative group effects found in brainstorming. The basic concept of the Delphi
Chapter 11
478
technique is to derive a consensus among a panel of experts who make predictions about
future developments. Developed by the Rand Corporation for the U.S. Air Force in the late
1960s, the Delphi technique is a systematic, interactive forecasting procedure based on
independent and anonymous input regarding future events. The Delphi technique uses
repeated rounds of questioning and written responses, including feedback to responses in
earlier rounds, to take advantage of group input while avoiding the possible biasing effects
of oral panel deliberations. To use the Delphi technique, you must select a panel of experts
for the particular area in question. For example, Cliff Branch from the opening case could
use the Delphi technique to help him understand why his company is no longer winning
many contracts. Cliff could assemble a panel of people with knowledge in his business area.
Each expert would answer questions related to Cliff's situation, and then Cliff or a facilitator
would evaluate their responses, together with opinions and justifications, and provide that
feedback to each expert in the next iteration. Cliff would continue this process until the
group responses converge to a specific solution. If the responses diverge, the facilitator of
the Delphi technique needs to determine if there is a problem with the process.
Interviewing is a fact-finding technique for collecting information in face-to-face,
phone, e-mail, or virtual discussions. Interviewing people with similar project experience
is an important tool for identifying potential risks. For example, if a new project involves
using a particular type of hardware or software, people who had recent experience with
that hardware or software could describe their problems on a past project. If people have
worked with a particular customer, they might provide insight into the potential risks of
working for that customer again. It is important to be well prepared for leading interviews;
it often helps to create a list of questions to use as a guide during the interview.
It is not uncommon for people to identify problems or opportunities without really
understanding them. Before suggesting courses of action, it is important to identify the root
cause of a problem or opportunity. Root cause analysis (as you learned in Chapter 8, Project
Quality Management) often results in identifying even more potential risks for a project.
Another technique is a SWOT analysis of strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and
threats, which is often used in strategic planning. SWOT analysis can also be used during
risk identification by having project teams focus on the broad perspectives of potential
risks for particular projects. (You first learned about SWOT analysis in Chapter 4, Project
Integration Management.) For example, before writing a particular proposal, Cliff Branch
could have a group of his employees discuss in detail their company's strengths, their
weaknesses for the project, and what opportunities and threats exist. Do they know that
several competing firms are much more likely to win a certain contract? Do they know
that winning a particular contract will likely lead to future contracts and help expand their
business? Applying SWOT to specific potential projects can help identify the broad risks
and opportunities that apply in that scenario.
The Risk Register
One important output of risk identification is a list of identified risks and other
information needed to begin creating a risk register. A risk register is a document that
contains results of various risk management processes; it is often displayed in a table or
spreadsheet format. A risk register is a tool for documenting potential risk events and
related information. Risk events refer to specific, uncertain events that may occur to the
Project Risk Management
479
detriment or enhancement of the project. For example, negative risk events might include
the performance failure of a product created as part of a project, delays in completing
work as scheduled, increases in estimated costs, supply shortages, litigation against the
company, and strikes. Examples of positive risk events include completing work sooner or
cheaper than planned, collaborating with suppliers to produce better products, and good
publicity resulting from the project.
Table 11-4 provides a sample of the format for a risk register that Cliff and his
managers from the opening case might use on a new project. Actual data that might be
entered for one of the risks is included below the table. Notice the main headings often
included in the register. Many of these items are described in more detail later in this
chapter. Elements of a risk register include the following:

An identification number for each risk event: The project team may want to
sort by risk events or quickly search for specific risk events, so they need to
identify each risk with a unique descriptor, such as an identification number.

A rank for each risk event: The rank is usually a number, with 1 representing
the highest risk.

The name of the risk event: Example names include defective server, late
completion of testing, reduced consulting costs, and good publicity.

A description of the risk event: Because the name of a risk event is often
abbreviated, it helps to provide a more detailed description. Consider using
a risk statement format similar to the following: "Because of <one or more
causes>, <risk event> might occur, which would lead to <one or more
effects>." For example, reduced consulting costs might be expanded to:
"Because this particular consultant enjoys working for our company and is
open to negotiating her rates, reduced consulting costs might occur, which
could lead to saving money on the project."

The category under which the risk event falls: For example, defective server
might fall under the broader category of technology or hardware technology.

The root cause of the risk: The root cause of the defective server might be a
defective power supply.

Triggers for each risk: Triggers are indicators or symptoms of actual risk
events. For example, cost overruns on early activities may be symptoms of
poor cost estimates. Defective products may be symptoms of a low-quality
supplier. Documenting potential risk symptoms for projects also helps the
project team identify more potential risk events.
No.
Rank
Risk
Description
Category
Root
Cause
Triggers
Potential
Responses
Risk
Owner
Probability Impact
Status
R44 1
R21 2
R7
3
Table 11-4  Sample risk register
Chapter 11
480

Potential responses to each risk: A potential response to the defective server
might be to include a clause in the supplier's contract to replace the server
within a certain time period at a negotiated cost.

The risk owner or person who will take responsibility for the risk: For
example, a certain person might be in charge of any server-related risk events
and managing response strategies.

The probability of the risk occurring: There might be a high, medium, or low
probability of a certain risk event. For example, the risk might be low that
the server would actually be defective.

The impact to the project if the risk occurs: There might be a high, medium,
or low impact to project success if the risk event actually occurs. A defective
server might have a high impact on successfully completing a project on time.

The status of the risk: Did the risk event occur? Was the response strategy
completed? Is the risk no longer relevant to the project? For example, a contract
clause may have been completed to address the risk of a defective server.
For example, the following data might be entered for the first risk in the register.
Notice that Cliff's team is taking a proactive approach in managing this risk.

No.: R44

Rank: 1

Risk: New customer

Description: We have never done a project for this organization before and
don't know too much about them. One of our company's strengths is building
good customer relationships, which often leads to further projects with that
customer. We might have trouble working with this customer because they
are new to us.

Category: People risk

Root cause: We won a contract to work on a project without really getting to
know the customer.

Triggers: The new customer asked a lot of questions in person and via e-mail
that our existing customers would not, so we could easily misunderstand
their needs and expectations.

Potential responses: Make sure the project manager is sensitive to the
fact that this is a new customer and takes the time to understand them.
Have the PM set up a meeting to get to know the customer and clarify their
expectations. Have Cliff attend the meeting, too.

Risk owner: Project manager

Probability: Medium

Impact: High

Status: PM will set up the meeting within the week.
The Risk Report
Another important output of identifying risks is creation of a risk report. Overall project
risk is the effect of uncertainty on the project as a whole. Contents of a risk report
include sources of overall project risk, important drivers of overall project risk exposure,
Project Risk Management
481
and summary information on risk events, such as number of risks, total risk exposure,
distribution across risk categories, metrics, and trends. The risk report is developed
progressively during the entire risk planning processes.
After identifying risks, the next step is to understand which risks are most important
by performing qualitative risk analysis.
Performing Qualitative Risk Analysis
Qualitative risk analysis involves assessing the likelihood and impact of identified risks to
determine their magnitude and priority. This section describes how to use a probability/
impact matrix to produce a prioritized list of risks. It also provides examples of using the
Top Ten Risk Item Tracking technique to produce an overall ranking for project risks and
to track trends in qualitative risk analysis. Finally, this section discusses the importance
of expert judgment in performing risk analysis. Note that some organizations simply
determine that risks are high, medium, or low and color code them as red, yellow, and
green, with very little analysis. Using the methods described in this section can greatly
improve qualitative risk analysis.
Using Probability/Impact Matrixes to Calculate Risk Factors
People often describe a risk probability or consequence as being high, medium or
moderate, or low. For example, a meteorologist might predict a high probability or
likelihood of severe rain showers on a certain day. If that day happens to be your wedding
day and you are planning a large outdoor ceremony, the consequences or impact of severe
showers might also be high.
A project manager can chart the probability and impact of risks on a probability/
impact matrix or chart, which lists the relative probability of a risk occurring and the
relative impact of the risk occurring. Many project teams would benefit from using this
simple technique to help them identify risks that need attention. To use this approach,
project stakeholders list the risks they think might occur on their projects. They then
label a risk as having a high, medium, or low probability of occurrence and a high,
medium, or low impact if it does occur.
The project manager then summarizes the results in a probability/impact matrix
or chart, as shown in Figure 11-5. For example, Cliff Branch and some of his project
managers in the opening case could each identify three negative and positive potential
risks for a particular project. They could then label the probability of occurrence and
impact of each risk as being high, medium, or low. For example, one project manager
might list a severe market downturn as a negative risk that is low in probability but high
in impact. Cliff may have listed the same risk as being medium in both probability and
impact. The team could then plot all of the risks on a matrix or chart, combine common
risks, and decide where those risks should be on the matrix or chart. The team should
then focus on risks that fall in the high sections of the probability/impact matrix or chart.
For example, Risks 1 and 4 are listed as high in both probability and impact. Risk 6 is high
in probability but low in impact. Risk 9 is high in probability and medium in impact, and
so on. The team should then discuss how it plans to respond to the risks if they occur, as
you will learn later in this chapter in the section on risk response planning.
Chapter 11
482
It may be useful to create a separate probability/impact matrix or chart for negative
risks and positive risks to make sure that both types are adequately addressed. Some
project teams also collect data on the probability of risks and the negative or positive
impact they could have on scope, time, and cost goals. Qualitative risk analysis is
normally done quickly, so the project team has to decide what type of approach makes the
most sense for its project.
Some project teams develop a single number for a risk score simply by multiplying
a numeric score for probability by a numeric score for impact. A more sophisticated
approach to using probability/impact information is to calculate risk factors. To quantify
risk probability and consequence, the U.S. Defense Systems Management College (DSMC)
developed a technique for calculating risk factors-numbers that represent the overall
risk of specific events, based on their probability of occurring and the consequences to
the project if they do occur. The technique makes use of a probability/impact matrix that
shows the probability of risks occurring and the impact or consequences of the risks.
Probabilities of a risk occurring can be estimated based on several factors determined
by the unique nature of each project. For example, factors to evaluate for potential hardware
or software technology risks could include the technology not being mature, the technology
being too complex, and an inadequate support base for developing the technology. The
impact of a risk occurring could include factors such as the availability of fallback solutions
or the consequences of not meeting performance, cost, and schedule estimates.
Figure 11-6 provides an example of how risk factors were used to graph the
probability of failure and consequence of failure in a research study on proposed
technologies for designing more reliable aircraft. The figure classifies potential
technologies (dots on the chart) as high, medium, or low risk, based on the probability
of failure and consequences of failure. The researchers strongly recommended that the
Figure 11-5  Sample probability/impact matrix
Probability
Medium
Impact
High
Medium
Low
Low
High
risk 6
risk 3
risk 7
risk 9
risk 2
risk 5
risk 11
risk 8
risk 10
risk 1
risk 4
risk 12
Project Risk Management
483
U.S. Air Force invest in the low- to medium-risk technologies and suggested that it not
pursue the high-risk technologies.15 The rigor involved in using the probability/impact
matrix and risk factors can provide a much stronger argument than simply stating that
risk probabilities or consequences are high, medium, or low.
Top Ten Risk Item Tracking
Top Ten Risk Item Tracking is a qualitative risk analysis tool. In addition to identifying
risks, it maintains an awareness of risks throughout the life of a project by helping to
monitor risks. Using this tool involves establishing a periodic review of the project's most
significant risk items with management; similar reviews can also occur with the customer.
The review begins with a summary of the status of the top ten sources of risk on the
project. The summary includes each item's current ranking, previous ranking, number
of times it appears on the list over a period of time, and a summary of progress made in
resolving the risk item since the previous review.
Table 11-5 provides an example of a Top Ten Risk Item Tracking chart that could
be used at a management review meeting for a project. This example includes only the
top five negative risk events. Notice that each risk event is ranked based on the current
month, previous month, and how many months it has been in the top ten. The last
column briefly describes the progress for resolving each risk item. You can have separate
charts for negative and positive risks or combine them into one chart.
A risk management review accomplishes several objectives. First, it keeps
management and the customer (if included) aware of major influences that could
prevent or enhance the project's success. Second, by involving the customer, the project
team may be able to consider alternative strategies for addressing the risks. Third, the
Figure 11-6  Chart showing high-, medium-, and low-risk technologies
1.0
Consequence of Failure (Cf)
Low
Risk
Medium
Risk
High Risk
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Probability
of Failure
(Pf)
Chapter 11
484
review promotes confidence in the project team by demonstrating to management and
the customer that the team is aware of significant risks, has a strategy in place, and is
effectively carrying out that strategy.
The main output of qualitative risk analysis is updating the risk register. The ranking
column of the risk register should be filled in, along with a numeric value or rating of high,
medium, or low for the probability and impact of the risk event. Additional information
is often added for risk events, such as identification of risks that need more attention in
the near term or those that can be placed on a watch list. A watch list is a list of risks that
have low priority but are still identified as potential risks. Qualitative analysis can also
identify risks that should be evaluated quantitatively, as you learn in the next section.
MONTHLY RANKING
Risk Event
Rank This
Month
Rank Last
Month
Number of
Months in
Top Ten
Risk Resolution Progress
Inadequate
planning
1
2
4
Working on revising the
entire project manage-
ment plan
Poor
definition
2
3
3
Holding meetings with
project customer and
sponsor to clarify scope
Absence of
leadership
3
1
2
Assigned a new project
manager to lead the
project after the previous
one quit
Poor cost
estimates
4
4
3
Revising cost estimates
Poor time
estimates
5
5
3
Revising schedule
estimates
Table 11-5  Example of top ten risk item tracking
M e d i a S n a p s h o t
Even more than 100 years after the Titanic sank on April 15, 1912, people mark the
anniversary on which more than 1,500 of the ship's passengers and crew died. A recent
article in PMI's Virtual Library explains how to avoid "the Titanic factor" in your proj-
ects by analyzing the interdependence of risks. For example, the probability of one risk
event occurring might change if another one materializes, and the response to one risk
(continued)
Project Risk Management
485
Performing Quantitative Risk Analysis
Quantitative risk analysis often follows qualitative risk analysis, yet both processes can be
done together or separately. On some projects, the team may only perform qualitative risk
analysis. The nature of the project and availability of time and money affect which risk
analysis techniques are used. Large, complex projects involving leading-edge technologies
often require extensive quantitative risk analysis. This section focuses on using the
quantitative risk analysis and modeling techniques of decision tree analysis, simulation,
and sensitivity analysis.
Decision Trees and Expected Monetary Value
A decision tree is a diagramming analysis technique used to help select the best course
of action when future outcomes are uncertain. A common application of decision tree
analysis involves calculating expected monetary value. Expected monetary value (EMV)
is the product of a risk event probability and the risk event's monetary value. To illustrate
this concept, Figure 11-7 uses the issue of which project(s) an organization might pursue.
Suppose Cliff Branch's firm was trying to decide if it should submit a proposal for Project 1,
Project 2, both projects, or neither project. The team could draw a decision tree with
two branches, one for Project 1 and one for Project 2. The firm could then calculate the
expected monetary value to help make this decision.
To create a decision tree, and to calculate expected monetary value specifically, you
must estimate the probabilities or chances of certain events occurring. For example,
Figure 11-7 shows a 20 percent probability (
.20)
P 5
that Cliff's firm will win the contract
event might affect another. The article's author addresses the issue of how project risks
interact and how project teams can address those risks. Some of the interdependent risk
events on the Titanic included the following:

The design of the bulkheads, rudder, and engines were integrated. As six of the
16 watertight compartments were breached and began flooding, the weight of
the water in the bow pulled the ship under until the bulkheads overtopped.
The rudder design was considered adequate for use on the open seas, but it
was undersized for the tight maneuvers required that fateful night. The central
propeller had a steam turbine as its power source, but this engine could not be
reversed and was stopped during the run up to the iceberg. This stopped the
water flow past the rudder and became a critical problem for the ship.

Several procedures were not followed, which had the cumulative effect of
creating other major problems. Iceberg reports from two other ships were not
passed on to the bridge. The wireless radio did not work most of the day, so
another critical iceberg warning failed to reach the Titanic's captain. The ship
was traveling too fast for the amount of ice in the area, and visibility was ter-
rible that night.

Unknown risk events also contributed to the sinking of the Titanic. For exam-
ple, the steel in the hull could not withstand the cold temperatures, causing it
to break without bending. Iron rivet heads also burst due to the cold.16
Chapter 11
486
for Project 1, which is estimated to be worth $300,000 in profits-the outcome of the top
branch in the figure. There is an 80 percent probability (
.80)
P 5
that the firm will not win
the contract for Project 1, and the outcome is estimated to be −$40,000, meaning that
the firm will have invested $40,000 into Project 1 with no reimbursement if it does not
win the contract. The sum of the probabilities for outcomes for each project must equal
one (for Project 1, .20 plus .80). Probabilities are normally determined based on expert
judgment. Cliff or other people in his firm should have a sense of the likelihood of winning
certain projects.
Figure 11-7 also shows probabilities and outcomes for Project 2. Suppose there is
a 20 percent probability that Cliff's firm will lose $50,000 on Project 2, a 10 percent
probability that it will lose $20,000, and a 70 percent probability that it will earn $60,000.
Again, experts would need to estimate these dollar amounts and probabilities.
To calculate the EMV for each project, multiply the probability by the outcome value
for each potential outcome for each project and sum the results. To calculate the EMV for
Project 1, going from left to right, multiply the probability by the outcome for each branch
and sum the results. In this example, the EMV for Project 1 is $28,000.
1
5
2
5
2
1
2
1
5 2
2
1
5
.2($300,000)
.8($40,000)
$60,000
$32,000
$28,000
The EMV for Project 2 is $30,000.
.2(
$50,000)
.1(
$20,000)
.7($60,000)
$10,000
$2,000
$42,000
$30,000
Because the EMV provides an estimate for the total dollar value of a decision, you want
to have a positive number; the higher the EMV, the better. Because the EMV is positive for
both Projects 1 and 2, Cliff's firm would expect a positive outcome from each and could bid
Figure 11-7  Expected monetary value (EMV) example
Decision
Probability (P)
Project 1
Project 2
P = .20
P = .80
times
EMV of Outcome
*
$300,000 = +$60,000
*
-$40,000 = -$32,000
P = 20
P = .10
P = .70
*
*
*
-$50,000 = -$10,000
-$20,000 = -$2,000
$60,000 = $42,000
Project 1's EMV = $60,000 - $32,000 = $28,000
Project 2's EMV = -$10,000 - $2,000 + $42,000 = $30,000
Project Risk Management
487
on both projects. If it had to choose between the two projects, perhaps because of limited
resources, Cliff's firm should bid on Project 2 because it has a higher EMV.
Notice in Figure 11-7 that if you just look at the potential outcome of the two
projects, Project 1 looks more appealing. You could earn $300,000 in profits from
Project 1, but you could only earn $60,000 for Project 2. If Cliff were a risk seeker, he
would naturally want to bid on Project 1. However, there is only a 20 percent chance
of earning the $300,000 on Project 1, as opposed to a 70 percent chance of earning
$60,000 on Project 2. Using EMV helps account for all possible outcomes and their
probabilities of occurrence, thereby reducing the tendency to pursue overly aggressive
or conservative risk strategies.
Simulation
A more sophisticated technique for quantitative risk analysis is simulation, which uses
a representation or model of a system to analyze its expected behavior or performance.
Most simulations are based on some form of Monte Carlo analysis. Monte Carlo analysis
simulates a model's outcome many times to provide a statistical distribution of the
calculated results. For example, Monte Carlo analysis can determine that a project will
finish by a certain date only 10 percent of the time, and determine another date for which
the project will finish 50 percent of the time. In other words, Monte Carlo analysis can
predict the probability of finishing by a certain date or the probability that the cost will be
equal to or less than a certain value.
You can use several different types of distribution functions when performing a Monte
Carlo analysis. The following example is a simplified approach. The basic steps of a Monte
Carlo analysis are as follows:
1. Collect the most likely, optimistic, and pessimistic estimates for the variables
in the model. For example, if you are trying to determine the likelihood of
meeting project schedule goals, the project network diagram would be your
model. You would collect the most likely, optimistic, and pessimistic time
estimates for each task. Notice that this step is similar to collecting data for
performing PERT estimates. However, instead of applying the same PERT
weighted average formula, you perform the following steps in a Monte Carlo
simulation.
2. Determine the probability distribution of each variable. What is the
likelihood of a variable falling between the optimistic and most likely
estimates? For example, if an expert assigned to a particular task provides
a most likely estimate of 10 weeks, an optimistic estimate of 8 weeks, and
a pessimistic estimate of 15 weeks, you then ask about the probability of
completing that task between 8 and 10 weeks. The expert might respond that
there is a 20 percent probability.
3. For each variable, such as the time estimate for a task, select a random value
based on the probability distribution for the occurrence of the variable. For
example, using the preceding scenario, you would randomly pick a value
between 8 weeks and 10 weeks 20 percent of the time and a value between
10 weeks and 15 weeks 80 percent of the time.
Chapter 11
488
4. Run a deterministic analysis or one pass through the model using the
combination of values selected for each of the variables. For example,
one task described in the preceding scenario might have a value of 12
on the first run. All of the other tasks would also have one random value
assigned to them on the first run, based on their estimates and probability
distributions.
5. Repeat Steps 3 and 4 many times to obtain the probability distribution of
the model's results. The number of iterations depends on the number of
variables and the degree of confidence required in the results, but it typically
lies between 100 and 1,000. Using the project schedule as an example, the
final simulation results will show you the probability of completing the entire
project within a certain time period.
Figure 11-8 illustrates the results from a Monte Carlo-based simulation of a project
schedule. The simulation was done using Microsoft Project and Risk+ software. On the
left side of Figure 11-8 is a chart displaying columns and an S-shaped curve. The height
of each column indicates how many times the project was completed in a given time
interval during the simulation run, which is the sample count. In this example, the time
interval was two working days, and the simulation was run 250 times. The first column
shows that the project was completed by January 29 only two times during the simulation.
The S-shaped curve shows the cumulative probability of completing the project on or
before a given date. The right side of Figure 11-8 shows the information in tabular form.
For example, there is a 10 percent probability that the project will be completed by 2/8
(February 8), a 50 percent chance of completion by 2/17 (February 17), and a 90 percent
chance of completion by 2/25 (February 25).
Figure 11-8  Sample Monte Carlo-based simulation results for project schedule
Sample Count
2/17
3/10
4.5
9.0
13.5
18.0
22.5
27.0
31.5
36.0
40.5
45.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1/29
Date: 1/14 11:13:56 AM
Number of Samples: 250
Unique ID: 1
Name: Widget
Completion Std Deviation: 5.2 days
95% Conﬁdence Interval: 0.6 day
Each bar represents 2 days.
Cumulative Probability
Completion Date
Prob
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
Completion Probability Table
Date
2/4
2/8
2/9
2/10
2/11
2/12
2/15
2/15
2/16
2/17
Date
2/17
2/18
2/19
2/22
2/22
2/23
2/24
2/25
2/26
3/10
Prob
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
Project Risk Management
489
Several PC-based software packages that perform Monte Carlo simulations are
available. Many products display the major risk drivers for a project based on the
simulation results. This enables you to identify the chief source of uncertainty in a project
schedule. For example, a wide range for a certain task estimate might cause most of the
uncertainty in the project schedule. You will learn more about using simulation software
and other software related to project risk management later in this chapter.
W h a t W e n t R i g h t ?
Microsoft Excel is a common tool for performing quantitative risk analysis. Microsoft
provides examples of how to use Excel to perform Monte Carlo simulation on its website,
and explains how several companies use Monte Carlo simulation as an important tool for
decision making:

General Motors uses simulation for forecasting its net income, predicting struc-
tural costs and purchasing costs of vehicles, and determining the company's
susceptibility to different kinds of risk, such as interest rate changes and
exchange rate fluctuations.

Eli Lilly uses simulation to determine the optimal plant capacity that should be
built for developing each drug.

Procter & Gamble uses simulation to model and optimally hedge foreign
exchange risk.17
Monte Carlo simulation can also help reduce schedule risk on agile projects. For
example, instead of using linear techniques, which assume a fixed future velocity and
a discrete completion date, you can use Monte Carlo simulation to estimate a range
of completion dates. "Consider a simple scenario where two teams both have an aver-
age velocity of 7.5. Using this average, either team could deliver the next 45 points in
6 iterations. However, suppose Team A's historical velocity values were 10, 4, 5, and 11,
and Team B's historical velocity values were 7, 8, 8, and 7. The average is the same, but
because the velocity values for Team A have a higher variance, there is greater risk when
predicting future results."18
Sensitivity Analysis
Many people are familiar with using sensitivity analysis to see the effects of changing one
or more variables on an outcome. For example, many people perform a sensitivity analysis
to determine their monthly payments for a loan given different interest rates or periods
of the loan. What will your monthly mortgage payment be if you borrow $100,000 for
30 years at a 6 percent rate? What will the payment be if the interest rate is 7 percent?
What will the payment be if you decide to pay off the loan in 15 years at 5 percent?
Many professionals use sensitivity analysis to help make several common business
decisions, such as determining break-even points based on different assumptions. People
often use spreadsheet software like Microsoft Excel to perform sensitivity analysis. Figure 11-9
Chapter 11
490
shows an example Excel file created to quickly show the break-even point for a product based
on various inputs: the sales price per unit, the manufacturing cost per unit, and fixed monthly
expenses. The current inputs result in a break-even point of 6,250 units sold. Users of this
spreadsheet can change inputs and see the effects on the break-even point in chart format.
Project teams often create similar models to determine the sensitivity of various project
variables. For example, Cliff's team could develop sensitivity analysis models to estimate their
profits on jobs by varying the number of hours required to do the jobs or by varying costs
per hour.
The main outputs of quantitative risk analysis are updates to project documents,
such as the risk report and risk register. The quantitative analysis also provides high-level
information about the probabilities of achieving certain project objectives. This information
might cause the project manager to suggest changes in contingency reserves. In some cases,
projects may be redirected or canceled based on the quantitative analysis, or the quantitative
analysis might be used to help initiate new projects to help the current one succeed.
Planning Risk Responses
After an organization identifies and quantifies risks, it must develop an appropriate
response to them. Developing a response to risks involves developing options and defining
strategies for reducing negative risks and enhancing positive risks.
Figure 11-9  Sample sensitivity analysis for determining break-even point
Project Risk Management
491
The five basic response strategies for negative risks are as follows:

Risk avoidance or eliminating a specific threat, usually by eliminating
its causes. Of course, not all risks can be eliminated, but specific risk
events can be. For example, a project team may decide to continue using
a specific piece of hardware or software on a project because the team
knows it works. Other products that could be used on the project may
be available, but if the project team is unfamiliar with them, they could
cause significant risk. Using familiar hardware or software eliminates
this risk.

Risk acceptance or accepting the consequences if a risk occurs. For example,
a project team planning a big project review meeting could take an active
approach to risk by having a contingency or backup plan and contingency
reserves if the team cannot get approval for a specific meeting site. On the
other hand, the team could take a passive approach and accept whatever
facility the organization provides.

Risk transference or shifting the consequence of a risk and responsibility
for its management to a third party. For example, risk transference is often
used in dealing with financial risk exposure. A project team may purchase
special insurance or warranty protection for specific hardware needed for a
project. If the hardware fails, the insurer must replace it within a specified
period of time.

Risk mitigation or reducing the impact of a risk event by reducing the
probability of its occurrence. Suggestions for reducing common sources
of risk on IT projects were provided at the beginning of this chapter.
Other examples of risk mitigation include using proven technology,
having competent project personnel, using various analysis and validation
techniques, and buying maintenance or service agreements from
subcontractors.

Risk escalation or notifying a higher level authority. If the risk is outside of
the scope of the project or the proposed response is outside of the project
manager's authority, it would make sense to escalate the risk to a higher-level
manager within the organization.
Table 11-6 provides general mitigation strategies for technical, cost, and schedule
risks on projects.19 Note that increasing the frequency of project monitoring and using
a WBS and Critical Path Method (CPM) are strategies for all three areas. Increasing the
project manager's authority is a strategy for mitigating technical and cost risks, and
selecting the most experienced project manager is recommended for reducing schedule
risks. Improving communication is also an effective strategy for mitigating risks.
The five basic response strategies for positive risks are as follows:

Risk exploitation or doing whatever you can to make sure the positive risk
happens. For example, suppose that Cliff's company funded a project to
provide new computer classrooms for a nearby school in need. They might
select one of their top project managers to organize news coverage of the
project, write a press release, or hold some other public event to ensure that
Chapter 11
492
the project produces good public relations for the company, which could lead
to more business.

Risk sharing or allocating ownership of the risk to another party. Using
the same example of implementing new computer classrooms, the
project manager could form a partnership with the school's principal,
school board, or parent-teacher organization to share responsibility for
achieving good public relations for the project. On the other hand, the
company might partner with a local training firm that agrees to provide
free training for all of the teachers on how to use the new computer
classrooms.

Risk enhancement or changing the size of the opportunity by identifying and
maximizing key drivers of the positive risk. For example, an important driver
of getting good public relations for the computer classrooms project might
be to generate awareness and excitement about it among students, parents,
and teachers. These groups might then do their own formal or informal
advertising of the project and Cliff's company, which in turn might interest
other groups and generate more business.

Risk acceptance also applies to positive risks when the project team does
not take any actions toward a risk. For example, the computer classrooms
project manager might assume that the project will result in good public
relations for the company and not feel compelled to do anything extra.

Risk escalation or notifying a higher level authority also applies to positive
risks. The computer classrooms project manager might escalate the risk of
partnering with another firm to a higher-level manager who may have more
influence with the firm.
Technical Risks
Cost Risks
Schedule Risks
Emphasize team support
and avoid stand-alone
project structure
Increase the frequency of
project monitoring
Increase the frequency of
project monitoring
Increase project manager
authority
Use WBS and CPM
Use WBS and CPM
Improve problem han-
dling and communication
Improve communication,
understanding of project
goals, and team support
Select the most experienced
project manager
Increase the frequency of
project monitoring
Increase project manager
authority
Use WBS and CPM
Source: J. Couillard
Table 11-6  General risk mitigation strategies for technical, cost, and schedule risks
Project Risk Management
493
The main outputs of risk response planning include updates to the project
management plan and other project documents and change requests. For example, if
Cliff's company decided to partner with a local training firm on the computer classrooms
project to share the opportunity of achieving good public relations, it could issue a change
request to write a contract with that firm. The project management plan and its related
plans might need to be updated if the risk response strategies require additional tasks,
resources, or time to accomplish. Risk response strategies often result in changes to the
WBS and project schedule, so plans that contain this information must be updated as
well. The risk response strategies also provide updated information for the risk register by
describing the risk responses, risk owners, and status information.
Risk response strategies often include identification of residual and secondary risks
as well as contingency plans and reserves, as described earlier. Residual risks are risks
that remain after all of the response strategies have been implemented. For example, even
though a stable hardware product may have been used on a project, there may still be a
risk that it fails to function properly. Secondary risks are a direct result of implementing
a risk response. For example, using the more stable hardware may have caused a risk of
peripheral devices failing to function properly.
Implementing Risk Responses
The main executing process performed as part of project risk management is
implementing risk responses as defined in the process to plan risk responses. Key outputs
include change requests and project documents updates (i.e. issue log, lessons-learned
register, project team assignments, risk register, and risk report). For example, Cliff's team
had identified the risk event of having a new customer. They listed several activities they
could perform to help manage this risk, such as making sure the project manager took
the time to understand the customer, setting up a meeting to get to know the customer
and clarify expectations, and having Cliff attend the meeting. In this case, Cliff's team was
proactive in identifying this risk and would take actions to prevent any negative events
from happening by implementing their risk responses.
Monitoring Risks
Monitoring risks involves ensuring the appropriate risk responses are performed, tracking
identified risks, identifying and analyzing new risk, and evaluating the effectiveness of
risk management throughout the entire project. Project risk management does not stop
with the initial risk analysis. Identified risks may not materialize, or their probabilities of
occurrence or loss may diminish. Previously identified risks may be determined to have a
greater probability of occurrence or a higher estimated loss value. Similarly, new risks will
be identified as the project progresses. Newly identified risks need to go through the same
process as those identified during the initial risk assessment. A redistribution of resources
devoted to risk management may be necessary because of relative changes in risk exposure.
Carrying out individual risk management plans involves monitoring risks based on
defined milestones and making decisions regarding risks and their response strategies.
Chapter 11
494
It may be necessary to alter a strategy that becomes ineffective, implement a planned
contingency activity, or eliminate a risk from the list of potential risks when it no longer
exists. Project teams sometimes use workarounds-unplanned responses to risk events-
when they do not have contingency plans in place.
Tools and techniques for monitoring risks include data analysis, audits, and meetings.
Outputs include work performance information, change requests, and updates to the
project management plan, project documents, and organizational process assets.
Using Software to Assist in Project Risk Management
As you saw in several parts of this chapter, you can use a variety of software tools to
enhance various risk management processes. Most organizations use software to create,
update, and distribute information in their risk registers. The risk register is often a simple
Microsoft Word or Excel file, but it can also be part of a more sophisticated database.
Spreadsheets can aid in tracking and quantifying risks, preparing charts and graphs, and
performing sensitivity analysis. Software can be used to create decision trees and estimate
expected monetary value.
More sophisticated risk management software, such as Monte Carlo simulation software,
can help you develop models and use simulations to analyze and respond to various risks.
Several high-end project management tools include simulation capabilities. Several software
packages have also been created specifically for project risk management. Although it has
become easier to do sophisticated risk analysis with new software tools, project teams must
be careful not to rely too heavily on software when performing project risk management. If a
risk is not identified, it cannot be managed, and intelligent, experienced people are needed
to do a good job of identifying risks. It also takes hard work to develop and implement good
risk response strategies. Software should be used as a tool to help make good decisions in
project risk management, not as a scapegoat when things go wrong.
Considerations for Agile/Adaptive Environments
The PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition provides the following information for project risk
management:
High-variability environments, by definition, incur more uncertainty and risk. To
address this, projects managed using adaptive approaches make use of frequent
reviews of incremental work products and cross-functional project teams to
accelerate knowledge sharing and ensure that risk is understood and managed. Risk
is considered when selecting the content of each iteration, and risks will also be
identified, analyzed, and managed during each iteration.
Additionally, the requirements are kept as a living document that is updated regularly,
and work may be reprioritized as the project progresses, based on an improved
understanding of current risk exposure.20
All type of projects should share knowledge related to risks as quickly as possible and
keep documents up to date. It is true that risk is considered during each iteration for
Project Risk Management
495
agile/adaptive projects, which does elevate its importance. Changing priorities can be
addressed more easily by changing the product backlog for each iteration.
Well-run projects, like a master violinist's performance, an Olympic athlete's gold
medal win, or a Pulitzer Prize-winning book, appear to be almost effortless. Those on the
outside-whether audiences, customers, or managers-cannot observe the effort that goes
into a superb performance. They cannot see the hours of practice, the edited drafts, or
the planning, management, and foresight that create the appearance of ease. To improve
IT project management, project managers should strive to make their jobs look easy-it
reflects the results of a well-run project. You can be a change agent in your organization
by stressing the need for good project risk management to help more projects succeed.
C a s e W r a p - U p
Cliff Branch and two of his senior people attended a seminar on project risk management
where the speaker discussed several techniques, such as estimating the expected mon-
etary value of projects and Monte Carlo simulations. Cliff asked the speaker how these
techniques could help his company decide which projects to bid on, because bidding
on projects often required up-front investments with the possibility of no payback. The
speaker walked through an example of EMV and then ran a quick Monte Carlo simula-
tion. Cliff did not have a strong math background and had a hard time understanding the
EMV calculations. He thought the simulation was much too confusing to have any practi-
cal use for him. He believed in his gut instincts much more than any math calculation or
computer output.
The speaker finally sensed that Cliff was not impressed, so she explained the impor-
tance of looking at the odds of winning project awards and not just at the potential prof-
its. She suggested using a risk-neutral strategy by bidding on projects that the company
had a good chance of winning (50 percent or so) and that had a good profit potential,
instead of focusing on projects that they had a small chance of winning and that had a
larger profit potential. Cliff disagreed with this advice, and he continued to bid on high-
risk projects. The two other managers who attended the seminar now understood why
the firm was having problems-their leader loved taking risks, even if it hurt the com-
pany. They soon found jobs with competing companies, as did several other employees.
Chapter 11
496
Chapter Summary
Risk is an uncertainty that can have a negative or positive effect on meeting project objectives.
Many organizations do a poor job of project risk management, if they do any at all. Successful
organizations realize the value of good project risk management.
Risk management is an investment; in other words, costs are associated with identifying
risks, analyzing those risks, and establishing plans to address them. Those costs must be
included in cost, schedule, and resource planning.
Risk utility or risk tolerance is the amount of satisfaction or pleasure received from a
potential payoff. Risk seekers enjoy high risks, risk-averse people do not like to take risks, and
risk-neutral people seek to balance risks and potential payoff.
Project risk management is a process in which the project team continually assesses
what risks may negatively or positively affect the project, determines the probability of such
events occurring, and determines the impact if such events occur. Risk management also
involves analyzing and determining alternate strategies to deal with risks. The processes of
risk management are planning risk management, identifying risks, performing qualitative risk
analysis, performing quantitative risk analysis, planning risk responses, implementing risk
responses, and monitoring risks.
Planning risk management is the process of deciding how to approach risk management
activities and plan for them in a project. Contingency plans are predefined actions that a project
team will take if an identified risk event occurs. Fallback plans are developed for risks that have a
high impact on meeting project objectives and are implemented if attempts to reduce the risk are
not effective. Contingency reserves or contingency allowances are provisions held by the project
sponsor or organization to reduce the risk of cost or schedule overruns to an acceptable level.
IT projects often involve several risks, including lack of user involvement, lack of executive
management support, unclear requirements, and poor planning. Lists developed by the
Standish Group and other organizations can help you identify potential risks on IT projects.
A risk breakdown structure is a useful tool that can help project managers consider potential
risks in different categories. Lists of common risk conditions in project management knowledge
areas can also be helpful in identifying risks, as can techniques such as brainstorming, the
Delphi technique, interviewing, and SWOT analysis. A risk register is a document that contains
results of various risk management processes; it is often displayed in a table or spreadsheet
format. A risk register is a tool for documenting potential risk events and related information.
Risk events refer to specific, uncertain events that may occur to the detriment or enhancement
of the project.
Risks can be assessed qualitatively and quantitatively. Tools for qualitative risk analysis
include a probability/impact matrix and the Top Ten Risk Item Tracking technique. Tools for
quantitative risk analysis include decision trees and Monte Carlo simulation. Expected monetary
value (EMV) uses decision trees to evaluate potential projects based on their expected value.
Simulations are a more sophisticated method for creating estimates to help you determine the
likelihood of meeting specific project schedule or cost goals. Sensitivity analysis is used to show
the effects of changing one or more variables on an outcome.
Project Risk Management
497
The five basic responses to negative risks are avoidance, acceptance, transference,
mitigation, and escalation. Risk avoidance involves eliminating a specific threat or risk. Risk
acceptance means accepting the consequences of a risk if it occurs. Risk transference is
shifting the consequence of a risk and responsibility for its management to a third party. Risk
mitigation is reducing the impact of a risk event by reducing the probability of its occurrence. Risk
escalation is elevating the risk event to a higher-level authority. Five basic response strategies
for positive risks are risk exploitation, risk sharing, risk enhancement, risk acceptance, and risk
elevation.
Implementing risk responses involves putting the appropriate risk response plans into
action. Monitoring risks involves monitoring the implementation of risk response plans, tracking
identified risks, identifying and analyzing new risks, and evaluating the effectiveness of risk
management throughout the entire project.
Several types of software can assist in project risk management. Monte Carlo-based
simulation software is a particularly useful tool to help you get a better idea of project risks and
top sources of risk or risk drivers.
Be sure to consider how project risk management can differ in agile/adaptive environments.
Discussion Questions
1. Discuss the risk utility function and risk preference chart in Figure 11-2. Would you rate
yourself as being risk-averse, risk-neutral, or risk-seeking? Give examples of each approach
from different aspects of your life, such as your current job, your personal finances,
romances, and eating habits.
2. What are some questions that should be addressed in a risk management plan?
3. Discuss the common sources of risk on IT projects and suggestions for managing them.
Which suggestions do you find most useful? Which do you feel would not work in your
organization? Why?
4. What is the difference between using brainstorming and the Delphi technique for risk
identification? What are some of the advantages and disadvantages of each approach?
Describe the contents of a risk register and how it is used in several risk management
processes.
5. Describe how to use a probability/impact matrix and the Top Ten Risk Item Tracking
approaches for performing qualitative risk analysis. How could you use each technique on a
project?
6. Explain how to use decision trees and Monte Carlo analysis for quantifying risk. Give an
example of how you could use each technique on an IT project.
7. Provide realistic examples of each of the risk response strategies for both negative and
positive risks.
8. List the tools and techniques for performing risk control.
9. How can you use Excel to assist in project risk management? What other software can help
project teams make better risk management decisions?
Chapter 11
498
Quick Quiz
1.
is an uncertainty that can have a negative or positive effect on meeting
project objectives.
a.
Risk utility
b.
Risk tolerance
c.
Risk management
d.
Risk
2. A person who is risk-
receives greater satisfaction when more payoff is at
stake and is willing to pay a penalty to take risks.
a.
averse
b.
seeking
c.
neutral
d.
aware
3. Which risk management process involves prioritizing risks based on their probability and
impact of occurrence?
a.
Planning risk management
b.
Identifying risks
c.
Performing qualitative risk analysis
d.
Performing quantitative risk analysis
4. Your project involves using a new release of a common software application, but if that
release is not available, your team has
plans to use the current release.
a.
contingency
b.
fallback
c.
reserve
d.
mitigation
5. Which risk identification tool involves deriving a consensus among a panel of experts by
using anonymous input regarding future events?
a.
Risk breakdown structure
b.
Brainstorming
c.
Interviewing
d.
Delphi technique
6. A risk
is a document that contains results of various risk management
processes, and is often displayed in a table or spreadsheet format.
a.
management plan
b.
register
c.
breakdown structure
d.
probability/impact matrix
Project Risk Management
499
7.
are indicators or symptoms of actual risk events, such as a cost overrun on
early activities being a symptom of poor cost estimates.
a.
Probabilities
b.
Impacts
c.
Watch list items
d.
Triggers
8. Suppose there is a 30 percent chance that you will lose $10,000 and a 70 percent chance
that you will earn $100,000 on a particular project. What is the project's estimated monetary
value?
a.
−$30,000
b.
$70,000
c.
$67,000
d.
−$67,000
9.
is a quantitative risk analysis tool that uses a model of a system to analyze
its expected behavior or performance.
a.
Simulation
b.
Sensitivity analysis
c.
Monte Carlo analysis
d.
EMV
10. Your project team has decided not to use an upcoming release of software because it might
cause your schedule to slip. Which negative risk response strategy are you using?
a.
avoidance
b.
acceptance
c.
transference
d.
mitigation
Quick Quiz Answers
1. d; 2. b; 3. c; 4. a; 5. d; 6. b; 7. d; 8. c; 9. a; 10. a
Exercises
1. Suppose your college or organization is considering a project to develop an information
system that would allow all employees, students, and customers to access and maintain
their own human resources information, such as address, marital status, and tax
information. The main benefits of the system would be a reduction in human resources
personnel and more accurate information. For example, if an employee, student, or
customer had a new telephone number or e-mail address, he or she would be responsible
for entering the data in the new system. The new system would also allow employees to
Chapter 11
500
change their tax withholdings or pension plan contributions. Identify five potential risks for
this new project, and be sure to list some negative and positive risks. Provide a detailed
description of each risk and propose strategies for addressing each risk. Document your
results in a short paper.
2. Review a document related to risk management, such as the Microsoft Security Risk
Management Guide. Does this guide address most of the topics related to risk management
planning, as described in this text? Document your analysis in a short paper.
3. Research risk management software. Are many products available? What are the main
advantages of using them in managing projects? What are the main disadvantages? Write a
short paper to discuss your findings, and include at least three references.
4. Suppose that your organization is deciding which of four projects to bid on, as summarized
in the following table. Assume that all up-front investments are not recovered, so they are
shown as negative profits. Draw a diagram and calculate the EMV for each project. Write
a few paragraphs explaining which projects you would bid on. Be sure to use the EMV
information and your personal risk tolerance to justify your answer.
Project
Chance of Outcome
Estimated Profits
Project 1
50 percent
50 percent
$120,000
−$50,000
Project 2
30 percent
40 percent
30 percent
$100,000
$ 50,000
−$60,000
Project 3
70 percent
30 percent
$ 20,000
−$ 5,000
Project 4
30 percent
30 percent
20 percent
20 percent
$ 40,000
$ 30,000
$ 20,000
−$50,000
5. Open the template file called breakeven using Microsoft Excel. Examine the formulas in
the file to understand the relationships between the variables (such as sales price per
unit, manufacturing cost per unit, and fixed monthly expenses) and the outputs (such as
break-even point and revenue at break-even point). Run at least three different scenarios,
changing the inputs as desired and noting the outputs. Write a short paper to summarize
the results, including screenshots of the three scenarios and your opinions on sensitivity
analysis in general and in this example.
6. Find an example of a company that took a big risk on an IT project and succeeded. In
addition, find an example of a company that took a big risk and failed. Summarize each
project and situation in a short paper. In the paper, you should also discuss whether you
believe that anything besides luck makes a difference between success and failure.
Project Risk Management
501
Running Case
You and your team identified some risks during the first week of the Global Treps Project.
However, you never ranked the risks or developed any response strategies. Because several
negative risk events have already occurred (such as Ashok breaking his wrist and poor
communications with a key stakeholder in Ethiopia, as described in Chapter 10), you have
decided to be more proactive in managing risks. You also want to address positive risks as well
as negative risks.
1. Create a risk register for the project, using Table 11-4 and the template called risk register.
Identify six potential risks, including risks related to the problems described in the preceding
paragraph. Include three negative and three positive risks. Describe the risks using the
format: "Because of <one or more causes>, <risk event> might occur, which would lead to
<one or more effects>."
2. Plot the six risks on a probability/impact matrix, using Figure 11-5 as a guide and the
template called probability impact matrix. Also assign a numeric value for the probability that
a risk will occur and the impact of each risk on meeting the main project objectives. Use a
scale of 1 to 10 to assign the values, with 1 representing the lowest value. For a simple risk
factor calculation, multiply the probability score and the impact score. Add a column called
Risk Score to your risk register to the right of the impact column. Enter the new data in the
risk register. Write your rationale for how you determined the scores for one of the negative
risks and one of the positive risks.
3. Develop a response strategy for one of the negative risks and one of the positive risks. Enter
the information in the risk register. Also write a separate paragraph describing what specific
tasks would be required to implement the strategy. Include time and cost estimates for each
strategy as well.
Key Terms
brainstorming
contingency allowances
contingency plans
contingency reserves
decision tree
Delphi technique
expected monetary value (EMV)
fallback plans
flowcharts
influence diagram
interviewing
known risks
management reserves
Monte Carlo analysis
probability/impact matrix or chart
residual risks
risk
risk acceptance
risk appetite
risk-averse
risk avoidance
risk breakdown structure
risk enhancement
risk events
risk exploitation
risk factors
Chapter 11
502
risk management plan
risk mitigation
risk-neutral
risk owner
risk register
risk-seeking
risk sharing
risk tolerance
risk transference
risk utility
secondary risks
sensitivity analysis
Top Ten Risk Item Tracking
triggers
unknown risks
watch list
workarounds
Endnotes

1 C. William Ibbs and Young Hoon Kwak, "Assessing Project Management Maturity," Project
Management Journal 31, no. 1 (March 2000), pp. 32-43.

2 Aneerav Sukhoo, Andries Barnard, Mariki M. Eloff, and John A. Van der Poll, "An
Assessment of Software Project Management Maturity in Mauritius," Issues in Informing
Science and Information Technology 2 (May 2003), pp. 671-690.

3 Peter Kulik and Catherine Weber, "Software Risk Management Practices-2001," KLCI
Research Group (August 2001).

4 David Hillson, "Boom, bust, and risk management," Project Manager Today (September
2008).

5 SAS, "Survey: Better risk management would have lessened credit crisis," SAS Press
Release (September 18, 2008).

6 Michael Versace, "Forecast: Financial Services Industry Will Continue to Spend Big on Risk
IT," Global Association of Risk Professionals (May 15, 2015).

7 David Hillson, "Integrated Risk Management as a Framework for Organisational Success,"
PMI Global Congress Proceedings (2006).

8 Hilson, David, "Managing Overall Project Risk," PMI Global Congress Proceedings (2014).

9 The Standish Group, CHAOS Manifesto 2015 (2015).

10 Andy Cole, "Runaway Projects-Cause and Effects," Software World 26, no. 3 (1995), pp. 3-5.

11 KPMG International, "Expectation of Risk Management Outpacing Capabilities - It's Time
for Action" (2013).

12 The Guardian, "Germanwings crash: Call for technology to enable remote command of
plane," The Guardian (April 15, 2015).

13 R. Max Wideman, "Project and Program Risk Management: A Guide to Managing Project
Risks and Opportunities" (Upper Darby, PA: Project Management Institute, 1992), II-4.

14 J. Daniel Couger, Creative Problem Solving and Opportunity Finding (New York: Boyd &
Fraser Publishing Company, 1995).

15 McDonnell Douglas Corporation, "Hi-Rel Fighter Concept," Report MDC B0642 (1988).
Project Risk Management
503

16 Bruce J. Weeks, "Risk Determination in Highly Interactive Environments: How to Avoid the
Titanic Factor in Your Project," PMI Virtual Library (2010).

17 Microsoft Corporation, "Introduction to Monte Carlo simulation," support.office.com/en-ca/
article/Introduction-to-Monte-Carlo-simulation-64c0ba99-752a-4fa8-bbd3-4450d8db16f1
(accessed June 18, 2015).

18 Jerry Odenwelder, "How to Reduce Agile Risk with Monte Carlo Simulation," VersionOne
(March 21, 2015).

19 Jean Couillard, "The Role of Project Risk in Determining Project Management Approach,"
Project Management Journal 25, no. 4 (December 1995), pp. 3-15.

20 Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of
Knowledge (PMBOK Guide) - Sixth Edition (2017), p. 400.

C h a p t e r 12
Project Procurement
Management
L e a r n i n g O b j e c t i v e s
After reading this chapter, you will be able to:

Explain the importance of project procurement management and the
increasing use of outsourcing for information technology (IT) projects

Describe the work involved in planning procurements for projects,
including determining the proper type of contract to use and preparing
a procurement management plan, statement of work, source selection
criteria, and make-or-buy analysis

Discuss how to conduct procurements and strategies for obtaining seller
responses, selecting sellers, and awarding contracts

Describe the process of controlling procurements by managing
procurement relationships and monitoring contract performance

Discuss types of software that are available to assist in project
procurement management

Discuss considerations for agile/adaptive environments
Chapter 12
506
The Importance of Project Procurement Management
Procurement means acquiring goods and services from an outside source. The term
procurement is widely used in government; many private companies use the terms
purchasing and outsourcing. Organizations or individuals who provide procurement
services are referred to as suppliers, vendors, contractors, subcontractors, or sellers; of
these terms, suppliers is the most widely used. Many IT projects involve the use of goods
and services from outside the organization. The Project Management Institute defines
an outside source as a source outside the project team, so the same organization can be
a supplier to the project team, or the project team can be a supplier to another group in
the organization. In fact, many IT departments in organizations are in direct competition
with outside vendors, and they are subject to the same kind of requirements definition,
statements of work, and bids. The rules and methods of sound project procurement
practices are good to follow regardless of who provides the services to whom.
As you learned in Chapter 2, outsourcing is a hot topic for research and debate,
especially the implications of outsourcing to other countries, which is called offshoring.
Gartner estimated the value of the global IT industry to reach $3.7 trillion, an increase
of 4 percent from 2017. The largest spending category is communications services at
39 percent of the total or about $1.4 trillion.1 According to a study by Deloitte, the
outsourcing market continues to grow:
O p e n i n g C a s e
Marie McBride could not believe how much money her company was paying for outside
consultants to help finish an important system conversion project. The consulting
company's proposal said it would provide experienced professionals who had completed
similar conversions, and that the job would be finished in six months or less with four
consultants working full time. Nine months later her company was still paying high
consulting fees, and half of the original consultants on the project had been replaced
with new people. One new consultant had graduated from college only two months
before and had extremely poor communications skills. Marie's internal staff complained
that they were wasting time training some of these "experienced professionals." Marie
talked to her company's purchasing manager about the contract, fees, and special clauses
that might be relevant to the problems they were having.
Marie was dismayed at how difficult it was to interpret the contract. It was very
long and obviously written by someone with a legal background. When she asked what
her company could do because the consulting firm was not following its proposal, the
purchasing manager stated that the proposal was not part of the official contract. Marie's
company was paying for time and materials, not specific deliverables. There was no
clause stating the minimum experience level required for the consultants, nor were there
penalty clauses for not completing the work on time. There was a termination clause,
however, meaning that the company could terminate the contract. Marie wondered
why her company had signed such a poor contract. Was there a better way to procure
services from outside the company?
Project Procurement Management
507

Outsourcing more mature business functions such as IT, human resources,
and finance continued to grow, as did additional functions, like real estate,
facilities management, and procurement.

Survey respondents cited the top reasons for outsourcing as cost cutting,
focusing on core business, and solving capacity issues.

"Companies are redefining the benefits of outsourcing by asking their service
providers to add value in ways beyond cost cutting, such as enabling mergers
and acquisitions (M&A activity, providing needed capacity, and advancing
functional capabilities)."2
Politicians debate whether offshoring helps their own country or not. Andy Bork,
chief operating officer of a computer network service provider, described outsourcing
as an essential part of a healthy business diet. He described the idea of good versus bad
outsourcing as something like good versus bad cholesterol. He said that most people view
offshoring as being bad because it takes jobs away from domestic workers. However, many
companies are realizing that they can use offshoring and create more jobs at home.4
Other companies, like Walmart, successfully manage the majority of their IT projects
G l o b a l I s s u e s
A recent approach to bringing IT jobs back to the U.S. is called urban onshoring. Soft-
ware testing in particular has sparked several organizations to work together to meet the
need for jobs in low income, high unemployment urban areas, improve quality and effi-
ciency, and reduce overseas costs. For example, Doran Jones Inc., a startup consulting
firm that does testing work for banks and media companies in Manhattan, partnered with
Per Scholas to create the first Urban Development Center (UDC) for software testing
projects. The UDC model develops the infrastructure, resources, and jobs in low-income
urban neighborhoods as part of a company's Corporate Social Responsibility strategy. Per
Scholas is the oldest and largest professional IT workforce development program in New
York City. They provide technology education, training, and job placement services for
over 4,500 unemployed and low-income adults.
Several start-up companies are applying similar models in an effort to improve bleak
neighborhoods, like Hunts Point in the South Bronx. Startup Box, founded by husband
and wife team Majora Carter and James Chase, is initially focusing on quality assurance
testing for games and apps like Game Chaser. To recruit testers, they hold gaming tour-
naments in and around Hunts Point and provide feedback on the games to developers,
similar to a focus group.
Doran Jones Inc. and Startup Box do not want their work to be viewed as charity
projects. "As offshoring becomes more and more problematic in the ever-changing tech
world ... on-shoring is a major market opportunity. They can make outsourcing more
efficient and diversify the talent pipeline in tech, in addition to bringing some much
needed jobs back to the US. Both Startup Box and Doran Jones have plans to replicate
this urban on shoring thing in other cities."3
Chapter 12
508
in-house with very little commercial software and no outsourcing at all. Other organiza-
tions are moving IT services back in-house, such as General Motors (GM). Randy Mott,
the CIO of GM and former CIO of Walmart, Dell, and Hewlett-Packard, overhauled GM's IT
operations and switched from outsourcing 90 percent of its IT services to only 10 percent
from 2012 to 2015. See the What Went Right? feature for a description of how Zulily con-
tinues to use in-house software development to provide a competitive advantage.
Deciding whether to outsource, what to outsource, and how to outsource are impor-
tant topics for many organizations throughout the world. Organizations are turning to out-
sourcing to accomplish the following:

Access skills and technologies. Organizations can gain access to specific
skills and technologies when they are required by using outside resources. As
mentioned earlier, a shortage of qualified personnel is the main reason that
companies outsource IT services. A project may require experts in a particu-
lar field for several months, or it might require specific technologies from an
outside source. Planning for this procurement ensures that the needed skills
and technologies will be available for the project.

Reduce both fixed and recurrent costs. Outsourcing suppliers often can use
economies of scale that may not be available to the client alone, especially
for hardware and software. It can also be less expensive to outsource some
labor costs to other organizations in the same country or offshore. Compa-
nies can use outsourcing to reduce labor costs on projects by avoiding the
costs of hiring, firing, and reassigning people to projects or paying their sala-
ries when they are between projects.
W h a t W e n t R i g h t ?
Retailer Zulily, a $1.5 billion company that celebrated its eight birthday in 2018, is one
of a growing number of organizations developing software in-house to meet their need for
speed and innovation. CIO Luke Friang said it would be nearly impossible for off-the-shelf
software to keep up with their pace. Zulily offers flash sales where items are available for
limited times only, and its website technology to track and customize the shopping expe-
rience are an essential part of their business strategy. Other companies gaining competi-
tive advantages by developing innovative, in-house software include ­General Motors and
Tesla Motors Inc.
Zulily developed proprietary algorithms that track customers throughout the site
and quickly make adjustments to meet changing consumer preferences. The retailer,
based in Seattle, sends customers e-mails containing deals targeted to what they've
bought from the site and to their page viewing patterns.
Under Friang's leadership for over seven years, the technology team has grown
20-fold. "We're currently making huge investments in our Big Data platform, our AWS
migration and our proprietary warehouse management software," Friang said. "We're
looking to make significant technology hires this year-currently hiring across product,
data science, supply chain and operations."5
Project Procurement Management
509

Allow the client organization to focus on its core business. Most organiza-
tions are not in business to provide IT services, yet many have spent valuable
time and resources on IT functions when they should have focused on core
competencies such as marketing, customer service, and new product design.
By outsourcing many IT functions, employees can focus on jobs that are
critical to the success of the organization.

Provide flexibility. Outsourcing to provide extra staff during periods of peak
workloads can be much more economical than trying to staff entire projects
with internal resources. Many companies cite better flexibility in staffing as a
key reason for outsourcing. As you learned in Chapter 2, Apple says it could
not produce several of its products fast enough without outsourcing.

Increase accountability. A well-written contract-a mutually binding agree-
ment that obligates the seller to provide specified products or services and
obligates the buyer to pay for them-can clarify responsibilities and sharpen
focus on key deliverables of a project. Because contracts are legally binding,
there is more accountability for delivering the work as stated in the contract.
Organizations must also consider reasons they might not want to outsource. When an
organization outsources work, it often does not have as much control over the aspects of
projects that suppliers carry out. In addition, an organization could become too dependent
on particular suppliers. If those suppliers went out of business or lost key personnel, it could
cause great damage to a project. Organizations must also be careful to protect strategic infor-
mation that could become vulnerable in the hands of suppliers. According to Scott McNealy,
co-founder and former CEO of Sun Microsystems, Inc., "What you want to handle in-house is
the stuff that gives you an edge over your competition-your core competencies. I call it your
'secret sauce.' If you're on Wall Street and you have your own program for tracking and ana-
lyzing the market, you'll hang onto that. At Sun, we have a complex program for testing micro-
processor designs, and we'll keep it."6 Project teams must think carefully about procurement
issues and make wise decisions based on the unique needs of their projects and organizations.
They must also be aware of political issues, as described in the following example.
W h a t W e n t W r o n g ?
In 2011, New York City's mayor, Michael Bloomberg, acknowledged that City Hall had
mismanaged its major IT projects and vowed to improve their oversight. He even said that
city administrators would not oppose legislation requiring them to alert the City Council
when projects ran into serious problems. These statements were made at a Council hear-
ing called in response to reports of troubled technology projects. For example, prosecu-
tors said the $700 million price tag for the CityTime payroll system was inflated by fraud,
and the mayor demanded $600 million back from the main contractor. The automated
personnel system, Nycaps, suffered significant delays and cost overruns due to leader-
ship issues, increasing from an original estimate of $66 million to over $363 million.
(continued)
Chapter 12
510
Outsourcing can also cause problems in other areas for companies and nations as a
whole. For example, in 2004 many people in Australia were concerned about outsourcing
software development. "The Australian Computer Society says sending work offshore
may lower the number of students entering IT courses, deplete the number of skilled IT
professionals, and diminish the nation's strategic technology capability. Another issue is
security, which encompasses the protection of intellectual property, integrity of data, and
the reliability of infrastructure in offshore locations."8 A 2018 article stated that the job
market for IT workers in Australia did improve as several companies brought jobs back
to the country. "We start 2018 off the back of a strong, stable run of jobs growth where
the labour market grew by over 383,000 positions in the past 12 months," said Nick
Deligiannis, Managing Director of Hays in Australia and New Zealand. "Basically, more
people are looking for and finding work."9
The success of many IT projects that use outside resources is often due to good
project procurement management. Project procurement management includes the
processes required to acquire goods and services for a project from outside the performing
organization. Organizations can be either the buyer or the seller of products or services
under a contract or other agreement.
There are three main processes in project procurement management:
1. Planning procurement management involves determining what to procure
and when and how to do it. In procurement planning, one must decide what
to outsource, determine the type of contract, and describe the work for
potential sellers. Sellers are providers, contractors, or suppliers who provide
goods and services to other organizations. Outputs of this process include
a procurement management plan, procurement strategy, bid documents,
procurement statement of work, source selection criteria, make-or-buy
decisions, independent cost estimates, change request, project documents
updates, and organizational process assets updates.
2. Conducting procurements involves obtaining seller responses, selecting sell-
ers, and awarding contracts. Outputs include selected sellers, agreements,
Caswell F. Holloway, the deputy mayor for operations, testified at the hearing that
the administration had begun an overhaul of how it manages complex technology proj-
ects. He said it would seek more use of off-the-shelf software and avoid paying consul-
tants by the hour when it could specify completion of key deliverables for payment. He
also said the city would stop letting individual agencies negotiate their own contracts
and bring in the city's Law Department and the Mayor's Office of Contract Services to
negotiate IT contracts worth more than $5 million.
"Other speakers at the hearing said that much of what Mr. Holloway was promising
to do was already written into city policy, to little effect. Henry Garrido, research direc-
tor for District Council 37, the municipal workers' union, said a standard clause in the
city's IT contracts allowed the city to sue contractors for damages. 'But the city doesn't
exercise it,' he said."7
Project Procurement Management
511
change requests, and updates to the project management plan, project docu-
ments, and organizational process assets.
3. Controlling procurements involves managing relationships with sellers, mon-
itoring contract performance, making changes as appropriate, and closing
out contracts. The main outputs of this process include closed procurements,
work performance information, procurement documentation updates, change
requests, project management plan updates, project documents updates, and
organizational process assets.
Figure 12-1 summarizes the inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of project pro-
curement management.
Figure 12-1  Project procurement management overview
12.1 Plan Procurement
Management
.1 Inputs
.1 Project charter
.2 Business documents
.3 Project management plan
.4 Project documents
.5 Enterprise environmental
factors
.6 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Data gathering
.3 Data analysis
.4 Source selection analysis
.5 Meetings
.3 Outputs
.1 Procurement management
plan
.2 Procurement strategy
.3 Bid documents
.4 Procurement statement
of work
.5 Source selection criteria
.6 Make-or-buy decisions
.7 Independent cost estimates
.8 Change requests
.9 Project documents updates
.10 Organizational process
assets updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Procurement documentation
.4 Seller proposals
.5 Enterprise environmental
factors
.6 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Advertising
.3 Bidder conferences
.4 Data analysis
.5 Interpersonal and team
skills
.3 Outputs
.1 Selected sellers
.2 Agreements
.3 Change requests
.4 Project management plan
updates
.5 Project documents updates
.6 Organizational process
assets updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Agreements
.4 Procurement documentation
.5 Approved change requests
.6 Work performance data
.7 Enterprise environmental
factors
.8 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Claims administration
.3 Data analysis
.4 Inspection
.5 Audits
.3 Outputs
.1 Closed procurements
.2 Work performance
information
.3 Procurement documentation
updates
.4 Change requests
.5 Project management plan
updates
.6 Project documents updates
.7 Organizational process
assets updates
12.2 Conduct
Procurements
12.3 Control
Procurements
Project Procurement
Management Overview
Source: PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition. Project Management Institute, Inc. (2017). Copyright and
all rights reserved. Material from this publication has been reproduced with permission of PMI.
Chapter 12
512
Planning Procurement Management
Planning procurements involves identifying which project needs can best be met by using
products or services outside the organization. It involves deciding whether to procure,
how to procure, what to procure, how much to procure, and when to procure. An impor-
tant output of this process is the make-or-buy decision, in which an organization decides
whether it should make certain products and perform certain services inside the organi-
zation, or if it is better to buy those products and services from an outside organization.
If there is no need to buy products or services from outside the organization, then further
procurement management is not needed.
Inputs needed for planning procurements include the project charter, business docu-
ments, the project management plan, project documents enterprise environmental fac-
tors, and organizational process assets, such as types of contracts.
Types of Contracts
Contract type is an important consideration in procurement management. Different types
of contracts can be used in different situations. Three broad categories of contracts are
fixed price or lump sum, cost reimbursable, and time and material. A single contract can
actually include all three of these categories if it makes sense for a particular procure-
ment. For example, you could have a contract with a seller that includes purchasing
specific hardware for a fixed price or lump sum, some services that are provided on a
cost-reimbursable basis, and other services that are provided on a time-and-material basis.
Project managers and their teams must understand and decide which approaches to use to
meet their project needs. It is also important to understand when and how to take advan-
tage of unit pricing in contracts.
Fixed-price or lump-sum contracts involve a fixed total price for a well-defined
product or service. The buyer incurs little risk in this situation because the price is
predetermined. The sellers often pad their estimate to reduce their risk, although they
realize their price must still be competitive. For example, a company could award a
fixed-price contract to purchase 100 laser printers with a certain print resolution and
print speed to be delivered to one location within two months. In this example, the
product and delivery date are well defined. Several sellers could create fixed-price
estimates for completing the job. Fixed-price contracts may also include incentives
for meeting or exceeding selected project objectives. For example, the contract could
include an incentive fee paid if the laser printers are delivered within one month.
A firm-fixed-price (FFP) contract has the least amount of risk for the buyer, followed by
a fixed-price incentive fee (FPIF) contract. A fixed-price with economic price adjust-
ment contract (FP-EPA) includes a special provision for predefined final adjustments to
the contract price due to changes in conditions such as inflation or the cost of specific
commodities. An FP-EPA contract is intended to protect both the buyer and seller from
external conditions beyond their control.
Contracts can also include incentives to prevent or reduce cost overruns. For exam-
ple, according to the U.S. Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) 16.4, fixed-price incentive
fee contracts can include a Point of Total Assumption (PTA), which is the cost at which
the contractor assumes total responsibility for each additional dollar of contract cost.
Project Procurement Management
513
Contractors do not want to reach the PTA because it hurts them financially, so they have
an incentive to prevent cost overruns. The PTA is calculated with the following formula:
PTA
(ceiling price
target price)/government share
target cost
5
2
1
For example, given the following information, and assuming that all dollar amounts
are in thousands, the PTA will be $1.2 million:
Ceiling price
$1,250
5
Target price
$1,100
5
Target cost
$1,000
5
Government share: 75 percent
PTA
($1,250
$1,100)/.75
$1,000
$1,20010
5
2
1
5
Contracts for the U.S. federal government can be very complex. Consult FAR 16.4 and
similar references for more details.
Cost-reimbursable contracts involve payment to the supplier for direct and indirect
actual costs. Recall from Chapter 7 that direct costs can be directly related to producing a
project's products and services. Normally, these costs can be traced back to a project in a
cost-effective way. Indirect costs are not directly related to the products or services of the
project, but they are indirectly related to performing the project. Normally, these costs can-
not be traced back to the project in a cost-effective way. For example, direct costs include
the salaries for people working directly on a project and hardware or software purchased for
a specific project. Indirect costs include the cost of providing a work space with electricity
and an employee cafeteria. Indirect costs are often calculated as a percentage of direct costs.
Cost-reimbursable contracts often include fees, such as a profit percentage or incentives for
meeting or exceeding selected project objectives. These contracts are often used for projects
that include providing goods and services that involve new technologies. The buyer absorbs
more of the risk with cost-reimbursable contracts than with fixed-price contracts. Three
types of cost-reimbursable contracts, in order of lowest to highest risk to the buyer, include
cost plus incentive fee, cost plus fixed fee, and cost plus percentage of costs.

With a cost plus incentive fee (CPIF) contract, the buyer pays the supplier
for allowable costs (as defined in the contract) along with a predetermined
fee and an incentive bonus. See the Media Snapshot for an example of provid-
ing financial incentives to complete an important construction project ahead
of schedule. Also, incentives are often provided to suppliers for reducing
contract costs. If the final cost is less than the expected cost, both the buyer
and the supplier benefit from the cost savings, according to a negotiated
share formula. For example, suppose that the expected cost of a project is
$100,000, the fee to the supplier is $10,000, and the share formula is 85/15,
meaning that the buyer absorbs 85 percent of the uncertainty and the sup-
plier absorbs 15 percent. If the final cost is $80,000, the cost savings are
$20,000. The supplier would be paid the final cost and the fee plus an incen-
tive of $3,000 (15 percent of $20,000), for a total reimbursement of $93,000.

With a cost plus fixed fee (CPFF) contract, the buyer pays the supplier for
allowable costs (as defined in the contract) plus a fixed fee payment that
Chapter 12
514
is usually based on a percentage of estimated costs. This fee does not vary,
however, unless the scope of the contract changes. For example, suppose that
the expected cost of a project is $100,000 and the fixed fee is $10,000. If the
actual cost of the contract rises to $120,000 and the scope of the contract
remains the same, the contractor will still receive the fee of $10,000.

With a cost plus award fee (CPAF) contract, the buyer pays the supplier
for allowable costs (as defined in the contract) plus an award fee based on
the satisfaction of subjective performance criteria. A tip or gratuity that you
would give a server in a restaurant would qualify as a simple example, as long
as there is no set gratuity percentage. You still pay for the cost of your meal,
but you can decide on the tip amount based on your satisfaction with the
food, drinks, and service provided. This type of contract is not usually sub-
ject to appeals.

With a cost plus percentage of costs (CPPC) contract, the buyer pays the
supplier for allowable costs (as defined in the contract) along with a prede-
termined percentage based on total costs. From the buyer's perspective, this
is the least desirable type of contract because the supplier has no incentive
to decrease costs. In fact, the supplier may be motivated to increase costs,
because doing so will automatically increase profits based on the percentage
of costs. This type of contract is prohibited for U.S. government use, but it is
sometimes used in private industry, particularly in the construction industry.
All of the risk is borne by the buyer.
M e d i a S n a p s h o t
Contract incentives can be extremely effective. On August 1, 2007, tragedy struck
­Minneapolis, Minnesota, when an Interstate bridge over the Mississippi River suddenly
collapsed, killing 13 motorists and injuring 150 people. The Minnesota Department
of Transportation (MnDOT) acted quickly to find a contractor to rebuild the bridge.
MnDOT also provided a strong incentive to finish the bridge as quickly as possible,
ensuring quality and safety along the way.
Peter Sanderson, project manager for the joint venture of Flatiron-Manson, led his
team in completing the rebuilding project three months ahead of schedule, and the new
bridge opened on September 18, 2008. The contractors earned $25 million in incentive
fees on top of their $234 million contract for completing the bridge ahead of schedule.
Why did MnDOT offer such a large incentive fee for finishing the project early?
"I-35W in Minneapolis is a major transportation artery for the Twin Cities and entire
state. Each day this bridge has been closed, it has cost road users more than $400,000,"
MnDOT Commissioner Tom Sorel remarked. "Area residents, business owners, motor-
ists, workers and others have been affected by this corridor's closure. The opening of this
bridge reconnects our community."11
Project Procurement Management
515
Time and material (T&M) contracts are a hybrid of fixed-price and cost-reimbursable
contracts. For example, an independent computer consultant might have a contract with a
company based on a fee of $80 per hour for services, plus a fixed price of $10,000 for provid-
ing specific project materials. The materials fee might also be based on approved receipts
for purchasing items, with a ceiling of $10,000. The consultant would send an invoice to
the company each week or month; the invoice would list the materials fee, the number of
hours worked, and a description of the work produced. This type of contract is often used
for required services when the work cannot be specified clearly and total costs cannot be
estimated in a contract. Many contract programmers and consultants, such as those Marie's
company hired in the chapter's opening case, prefer time and material contracts.
Unit pricing can also be used in various types of contracts to require the buyer to pay
the supplier a predetermined amount per unit of product or service. The total value of the
contract is a function of the quantities needed to complete the work. Consider an IT depart-
ment that might have a unit price contract for purchasing computer hardware. If the com-
pany purchases only one unit, the cost might be $1,000. If the company purchases 10 units,
the cost might be $10,000. This type of pricing often involves volume discounts. For exam-
ple, if the company purchases between 10 and 50 units, the contracted cost might be $900
per unit. If the company purchases more than 50 units, the cost might go down to $800 per
unit. This flexible pricing strategy is often advantageous to both the buyer and the seller.
Any type of contract should include specific clauses that account for unique project
issues. For example, if a company uses a time and material contract for consulting ser-
vices, the contract should stipulate different hourly rates based on the level of experience
of the individual contractors. The services of a junior programmer with no Bachelor's
degree and less than three years' experience might be billed at $40 per hour, whereas the
services of a senior programmer with a Bachelor's degree and more than 10 years of expe-
rience might be billed at $80 per hour.
Figure 12-2 summarizes the spectrum of risk to the buyer and the supplier for differ-
ent types of contracts. Buyers have the least risk with firm-fixed-price contracts, because
they know exactly what they must pay the supplier. Buyers have the most risk with cost
plus percentage of costs (CPPC) contracts because they do not know the supplier's costs
in advance, and the suppliers may be motivated to keep increasing costs. From the sup-
plier's perspective, a CPPC contract carries the least risk and a firm-fixed-price contract
carries the most risk.
Figure 12-2  Contract types versus risk
Seller risk
CPPC
Cost plus
percentage
of costs
CPFF
Cost plus
ﬁxed fee
CPIF
Cost plus
incentive
fee
FPI
Fixed-price
incentive
FP-EPA
Fixed-price
economic
price
adjustment
FFP
Firm-
ﬁxed
price
Buyer risk
CPAF
Cost plus
award fee
low
high
low
high
Chapter 12
516
Time and material contracts and unit-price contracts can be high or low risk, depend-
ing on the nature of the project and other contract clauses. For example, if an organization
is unclear in describing the work that needs to be done, it cannot expect a supplier to sign
a firm-fixed-price contract. However, the buyer could find a consultant or group of consul-
tants to work on specific tasks based on a predetermined hourly rate. The buying organiza-
tion could evaluate the work produced each day or week to decide if it wants to continue
using the consultants. In this case, the contract would include a termination clause-a
contract clause that allows the buyer or supplier to end the contract. Some termination
clauses state that the buyer can terminate a contract for any reason and give the supplier
only 24 hours' notice. Suppliers, by contrast, must often give a one-week notice to termi-
nate a contract and must have sufficient reasons for the termination. The buyer could also
include a contract clause that specifies hourly rates based on the education and experi-
ence of consultants. These contract clauses reduce the risk incurred by the buyer while
providing flexibility for accomplishing the work.
It is important to understand why a company would want to procure goods or ser-
vices and what inputs are needed to plan purchases and acquisitions. In the opening
case, Marie's company hired outside consultants to help complete an operating system
conversion project because it needed people with specialized skills for a short period of
time. This is a common occurrence in many IT projects. It can be more effective to hire
skilled consultants to perform specific tasks for a short period of time than to hire or keep
employees on staff full time.
However, it is also important to define clearly the scope of the project, the products,
services, or results required, market conditions, and constraints and assumptions. In
Marie's case, the scope of the project and services required were relatively clear, but her
company may not have adequately defined the market conditions or constraints and
assumptions involved in using outside consultants. Could other companies provide con-
sultants to help with similar conversion projects? Did the project team investigate the
background of the company that provided the consultants? Did the team list important
constraints and assumptions for using the consultants, such as limiting the time that the
consultants had to complete the conversion project or the minimum years of experience
for any consultant assigned to the project? It is important to answer these types of ques-
tions before signing an outsourcing agreement.
Tools and Techniques for Planning Procurement Management
Several tools and techniques are available to help project managers and their teams in
planning procurement management, including make-or-buy analysis (a type of data gath-
ering), expert judgment, and market research (a type of data gathering).
Make-or-Buy Analysis
Make-or-buy analysis is a general management technique used to determine whether an
organization should make a product or perform a service inside the organization or buy it
from someone else. This form of analysis involves estimating the internal costs of provid-
ing a product or service and comparing the estimate to the cost of outsourcing. Consider
a company that has 1,000 international salespeople with laptops. Using make-or-buy
Project Procurement Management
517
analysis, the company could compare the cost of providing those services using inter-
nal resources to the cost of buying the same services from an outside source. If supplier
quotes were less than the company's internal estimates, the company would have to con-
sider outsourcing the training and user support services. Another common make-or-buy
decision, though more complex, is whether a company should develop an application itself
or purchase software from an outside source and customize it to the company's needs.
Many organizations also use make-or-buy analysis to decide whether to purchase or
lease items for a project. For example, suppose that a project requires a piece of equip-
ment that has a purchase price of $12,000 and daily operating costs of $400. Suppose that
you could lease the same piece of equipment for $800 per day, including the operating
costs. You can set up an equation so that you can see when the purchase cost equals the
lease cost and determine when it makes sense financially to lease or buy the equipment.
In this example, d is the number of days you need the piece of equipment. The equation
would be
$800/day
$12,000
$400/day
5
1
Subtracting $400/day from both sides, you get
$400/day
$12,000
5
Dividing both sides by $400, you get
30
d 5
In other words, the purchase cost would equal the lease cost in 30 days. So, if you
need the equipment for less than 30 days, leasing would be more economical. If you need
the equipment for more than 30 days, you should purchase it. In general, leasing is often
cheaper for meeting short-term needs, but more expensive for long-term needs.
Expert Judgment
Experts both from inside and outside an organization can provide excellent advice in plan-
ning purchases and acquisitions. Project teams often need to consult experts within their
organization as part of good business practice. Internal experts might suggest that the
company in the preceding example could not provide training and support for the 1,000
laptop users because the service involves so many people with different skill levels in so
many different locations. Experts in the company might also know that most of their com-
petitors outsource this type of work and know who the qualified outside suppliers are. It
is also important to consult legal experts because contracts for outsourced work are legal
agreements.
Experts outside the company, including potential suppliers themselves, can also pro-
vide expert judgment. For example, suppliers might suggest an option for salespeople to
purchase the laptops themselves at a reduced cost. This option would solve problems that
would otherwise be created during employee turnover-exiting employees would own
their laptops and new employees would purchase a laptop through the program. An inter-
nal expert might then suggest that employees receive a technology bonus to help offset
what they might view as an added expense. Expert judgment, both internal and external,
is an asset in making many procurement decisions.
Chapter 12
518
Market Research
Market research is very important in planning procurements. Many potential suppliers are
often available for goods and services, so the project team must choose suppliers carefully.
Some organizations have a preferred vendor list and detailed information about them. A
wealth of information is also available online, and numerous conferences are held where
attendees can see and discuss new products.
Procurement Management Plan
As you have learned, every project management knowledge area includes some planning.
The procurement management plan is a document that describes how the procurement
processes will be managed, from developing documentation for making outside purchases
or acquisitions to contract closure. Like other project plans, contents of the procurement
management plan will vary with project needs. The following materials can be included in
a procurement management plan:

Guidelines for types of contracts to be used in different situations

Standard procurement documents or templates to be used, if applicable

Guidelines for creating contract work breakdown structures, statements of
work, and other procurement documents

Roles and responsibilities of the project team and related departments, such
as the purchasing or legal department

Guidelines for using independent estimates to evaluate sellers

Suggestions for managing multiple providers

Processes for coordinating procurement decisions with other project areas,
such as scheduling and performance reporting

Constraints and assumptions related to purchases and acquisitions

Lead times for purchases and acquisitions

Risk mitigation strategies for purchases and acquisitions, such as insurance
contracts and bonds

Guidelines for identifying prequalified sellers and organizational lists of pre-
ferred sellers

Procurement metrics to assist in evaluating sellers and managing contracts
Statement of Work
The statement of work (SOW) is a description of the work required for the procure-
ment. Some organizations use the term statement of work for a document that describes
internal work as well. If a SOW is used to describe only the work required for a particular
contract, it is called a contract statement of work. The contract SOW is a type of scope
statement that describes the work in sufficient detail to allow prospective suppliers to
determine if they can provide the required goods and services and to determine an appro-
priate price. A contract SOW should be clear, concise, and as complete as possible. It
should describe all services required and include performance reporting. It is important
to use appropriate wording in a contract SOW, such as must instead of may. For example,
must means that something has to be done; may implies that a choice is involved in doing
something or not. The contract SOW should specify the products and services required for
the project, use industry terms, and refer to industry standards.
Project Procurement Management
519
Many organizations use samples and templates to generate SOWs. Figure 12-3 pro-
vides a basic outline or template for a contract SOW that Marie's organization could use
when hiring outside consultants or purchasing other goods or services. For example, for
the operating system conversion project, Marie's company should specify the manufac-
turer and model number for the hardware involved, the former operating systems and new
ones for the conversion, and the number of pieces of each type of hardware involved. The
contract SOW should also specify the location of the work, the expected period of perfor-
mance, specific deliverables and when they are due, applicable standards, acceptance cri-
teria, and special requirements. A good contract SOW gives bidders a better understanding
of the buyer's expectations. A contract SOW should become part of the official contract to
ensure that the buyer gets what the supplier bid on.
Procurement or Bid Documents
Planning procurements also involves preparing the documents needed for potential
sellers to bid on a project and determining the evaluation criteria for the contract award.
The project team often uses standard forms and expert judgment as tools to help create
relevant procurement documents and evaluation criteria.
Figure 12-3  Statement of work (SOW) template
Statement of Work (SOW)
I .
Scope of Work: Describe the work to be done in detail. Specify the hardware
and software involved and the exact nature of the work.
I I .
Location of Work: Describe where the work must be performed. Specify the
location of hardware and software and where the people must perform the work.
I I I .
Period of Performance: Specify when the work is expected to start and end,
working hours, number of hours that can be billed per week, where the work must
be performed, and related schedule information.
I V.
Deliverables Schedule: List speciﬁc deliverables, describe them in detail, and
specify when they are due.
V.
Applicable Standards: Specify any company or industry-speciﬁc standards that
are relevant to performing the work.
V I .
Acceptance Criteria: Describe how the buyer organization will determine if the
work is acceptable.
V I I . Special Requirements: Specify any special requirements such as hardware or
software certifications, minimum degree or experience level of personnel, travel
requirements, and so on.
Chapter 12
520
Three common examples of procurement documents include a Request for Proposal
(RFP), a Request for Quote (RFQ), and a Request for Information (RFI). A Request for
Proposal (RFP) is a document used to solicit proposals from prospective suppliers. A pro-
posal is a document prepared by a seller when there are different approaches for meeting
buyer needs. For example, if an organization wants to automate its work practices or solve
a business problem, it can write and issue an RFP so suppliers can respond with proposals.
Suppliers might propose various hardware, software, and networking solutions to meet the
organization's need. Selections of winning sellers are often made on a variety of criteria, not
just the lowest price. Developing an RFP is often a time-consuming process. Organizations
must plan properly to ensure that they adequately describe what they want to procure,
what they want sellers to include in their proposals, and how they will evaluate proposals.
Although RFPs have been used for many years, outsourcing experts say the process is
becoming less appealing in several IT procurement processes. "In today's dynamic era of
technology change, the traditional RFP simply takes too long and costs too much. By the time
the proposals come in, the business requirements have often changed."12 Enterprise mar-
ketplaces, such as app stores that provide a collection of software and services for sale (i.e.,
Google Play, App Store, and IBM Cloud Marketplace) and other new purchasing processes will
emerge as companies collaborate with service providers to figure out better IT solutions.
A Request for Quote (RFQ) is a document used to solicit quotes or bids from pro-
spective suppliers. A bid, also called a tender or quote (short for quotation), is a docu-
ment prepared by sellers to provide pricing for standard items that the buyer has clearly
defined. Organizations often use an RFQ for solicitations that involve specific items. For
example, if a company wanted to purchase 100 personal computers with specific features,
it might issue an RFQ to potential suppliers. RFQs usually do not take nearly as long to
prepare as RFPs, nor do responses to RFQs. Selections are often based on the lowest bid.
A Request for Information (RFI) is sometimes used before issuing an RFP or RFQ to get
more information on the goods and services to be acquired.
Writing a good RFP is a critical part of project procurement management, but many
people have never had to write or respond to one. To generate a good RFP, expertise is
invaluable. Many examples of RFPs are available within different companies, from poten-
tial contractors, and from government agencies. Legal requirements are often involved in
issuing RFPs and reviewing proposals, especially for government projects. It is important
to consult with experts who know the contract planning process for particular organiza-
tions. To make sure that an RFP has enough information to provide the basis for a good
proposal, the buying organization should try to put itself in the suppliers' shoes. Could the
organization develop a good proposal based on the information it provided in the RFP?
Could it determine detailed pricing and schedule information based on the RFP? Develop-
ing a good RFP is difficult, as is writing a good proposal.
The main sections of an RFP usually include its statement of purpose, background
information on the organization issuing the RFP, the basic requirements for the products
and services being proposed, the hardware and software environment (which is usually
important for IT-related proposals), a description of the RFP process, the statement of
work and schedule information, and possible appendices. A simple RFP might be three to
five pages long, but an RFP for a larger, more complicated procurement might take hun-
dreds of pages.
Project Procurement Management
521
Other terms used for RFQs and RFPs include invitations for bid, invitations for negotia-
tion, and initial contractor responses. Regardless of what they are called, all procurement
documents should be written to facilitate accurate and complete responses from prospective
sellers. Procurement documents should include background information on the organization
and project, a relevant statement of work, a schedule, a description of the desired form of
response, evaluation criteria, pricing forms, and any required contractual provisions. The docu-
ments should also be rigorous enough to ensure consistent, comparable responses, but flexible
enough to allow consideration of sellers' suggestions for better ways to satisfy the requirements.
Examples from a Real RFP
Government agencies are often required to make procurement information open to the
public. For example, Houston First Corporation provides access to several documents from
www.houstonfirst.com/do-business/. One of these documents is an RFP issued in October,
2017 for project management services to assist the organization in overseeing rebuilding
after flooding from Hurricane Harvey. The initial RFP was nine pages long. A few excerpts
are provided in Table 12-1. Notice the detailed list of tasks in the section called "Scope of
Services." Also notice the detailed instructions in the section called "Proposal Format."
This RFP included the evaluation criteria, as discussed in more detail in the next section.
Even though the RFP in Table 12-1 seems pretty detailed, there were several questions
submitted from potential proposers. As a result, HFC issued three letters of clarification.
Table 12-2 lists a few items from these letters. Notice that the first item asks for hourly rates
instead of a lump-sum fee as initially requested. Proposers must have questioned the appro-
priateness of a lump-sum or fixed-price contract for this type of work. HFC responded by ask-
ing for rates and mentioning a "not-to-exceed amount" for the eight-month contract. There
is also a new section describing a pre-proposal conference, which the initial RFP said would
not be held. Again, potential proposers must have asked for this conference to help clarify the
procurement. Also notice the straightforward questions that were asked. As you can see, it's
very important for buyers to clarify what they want so that sellers can respond appropriately.
Table 12-1  Example RFP for project management services
I. Purpose of RFP: Houston First Corporation ("HFC") requests proposals from expe-
rienced project management firms with the ability to assist HFC in the oversight of
recovery and reconstruction projects at Wortham Theater Center and the Theater
District Underground Parking Garages in downtown Houston, Texas. . . . The rough
order of magnitude for the reconstruction phase, including ongoing emergency services
underway as of October 5, 2017, is estimated at 40-45 million dollars. Potential propos-
ers are advised that the contract resulting from the RFP will be a professional services
contract. This RFP is not for construction work.
II. Scope of Services: As the emergency remediation phase draws to a close, HFC seeks
to engage a project management firm to provide comprehensive coordination and sup-
port services throughout the reconstruction phase, including the following tasks:
(continued)
Chapter 12
522
a. Cost-estimating individual projects and advising HFC on matters pertaining to the
overall project budget;
b. Regular meetings with HFC, City of Houston officials, and their contractors;
c. Assisting HFC in the preparation of contract documents, including review of draw-
ings and specifications;
d. Reviewing questions received from potential contractors during the bidding
process;
e. Providing recommendations on construction feasibility, availability of materials
and labor, time requirements for installation and construction, and factors related
to cost;
f. Overall project management, including facilitating all phases of projects concur-
rently, from predesign through construction completion;
g. Project schedule development, including adjustments based on the progress of
work and specific recommendations for prioritizing and accelerating critical path
items;
h. Identification of long-lead items to facilitate the earliest feasible date for project
completion;
i. Value engineering assistance and best construction practices recommendations;
j. Project worksheet and other pertinent report preparation, review, content recom-
mendations, and hazard mitigation proposals required for reimbursement by FEMA
and any other applicable agency;
k. Collecting and organizing contracts, reports, logs, and other supporting documen-
tation necessary for project worksheets;
l. Managing third-party architectural and engineering contracts entered into by HFC
and meeting with design professionals;
m. Reviewing, reconciling and validating payment applications and invoices from
third-party construction contractors, architects and engineers;
n. Ensuring compliance with prevailing wage and hour requirements;
o. Close-out document review, including punch-list documentation; and
p. Other tasks and matters reasonably relating to the foregoing.
III. Term/Schedule Information: The duration of services to be performed by the pro-
poser selected is eight calendar months, subject to extension under the Project Manage-
ment Services Agreement.
IV. Proposal Format: Proposers are asked to include all of the following information in
their proposal:
a. Transmittal Letter: Briefly summarizing the proposer's understanding of the work to
be completed signed by a person authorized to make representations on behalf of the
firm, including a direct phone number and email address. Proposers must make a spe-
cific, unambiguous statement accepting and agreeing to comply, if selected, with the
Material Contract Terms and Conditions. Proposers may identify any objections within
or immediately following the letter; provided, however, that proposals including mate-
rial exceptions are deemed non-responsive and will be rejected without consideration.
Table 12-1  Example RFP for project management services (continued)
(continued)
Project Procurement Management
523
b. Project Team: A seasoned project management team is an essential element of a
successful proposal. Please identify the essential personnel who would be assigned
to work with HFC and provide a summary of their qualifications and experience.
c. Experience: The proposer selected must have substantial experience in disaster-
recovery projects and demonstrable ability to manage a broad multi-disciplinary
construction and professional services contracts simultaneously. Please discuss (no
more than) three completed project management contracts completed by members
of the Project Team that are comparable, in scope and complexity, to the require-
ments of this solicitation. Provide references for each project.
d. Pricing: Proposers must include a single lump-sum fee based on the information
provided in the RFP, including the Material Contract Terms and Conditions and
assuming an eight-month term. Additionally, proposers must provide a written and
formulaic explanation of how the proposer calculated the lump-sum fee.
e. Diversity Commitment: Proposers should indicate how they intend to meet the
30 percent Diversity Goal for this solicitation. Proposers are asked to identify any
probable MWBE and HUB subcontractors or consultants.

Proposals should be organized, clear and concise. Proposers are asked to avoid
excessive graphics, title pages, or other information other than requested in this
Proposal Format section.
V. Evaluation: HFC will review and rank every proposal received in response to this RFP
based on the following weighted criteria: Transmittal Letter (15 percent); Project Team
(25 percent); Experience (25 percent); Pricing (25 percent); and Diversity (10 percent).
HFC reserves the right to select or reject all or part of any proposal, waive minor technicali-
ties, and select proposals in the manner and to the extent that they serve the best interests
of HFC. This RFP does not commit HFC to award a contract, issue a purchase order, or
to pay any costs incurred in the preparation of a proposal in response to this RFP. HFC
reserves the right to request oral interviews, proposal clarifications/additional information,
and/or best-and-final offers from some or all proposers prior to making a final selection.
Source: Houston First Corporation (2017).
Table 12-1  Example RFP for project management services (continued)
Proposal Format: Subsection "d" of the "Proposal Format" section of the RFP, titled
"Pricing" is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following provision:
Proposers must provide a current hourly rate service schedule for their project
team, including all personnel expected to provide services for HFC.
Salaries and other employment costs of the project manager's personnel, over-
head, other general/administrative costs, and the cost of insurance required to
be maintained must be included in such rates.
The proposer selected will be reimbursed for the actual amount of reasonable
expenses incurred in the performance of contractual services for HFC to the
extent such expenses are approved in advance and in writing by HFC.
Table 12-2  Letters of clarification information from RFP
(continued)
Chapter 12
524
Source Selection Criteria
It is very important for organizations to prepare some form of evaluation criteria for source
selection, preferably before they issue a formal RFP. Organizations use criteria to rate or
score proposals, and they often assign a weight to each criterion to indicate its importance.
Some examples of criteria and weights include the technical approach (30 percent weight),
management approach (30 percent weight), past performance (20 percent weight), and
Subcontracts for estimators, schedulers, payment-application reviewers, docu-
ment controllers and, subject to mutual agreement, other project consultants
also constitute at-cost reimbursable expenses, provided that the selection pro-
cess is approved in advance by HFC.
HFC intends to negotiate a not-to-exceed amount with the top-ranked
proposer(s) for the eight-month period based on the foregoing. The finalist rep-
resenting the best value to HFC will be selected.
Pre-Proposal Conference: The "Pre-Proposal Conference" section of the RFP is hereby
deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following provision:
A tour of Wortham Theater Center and the Theater District Parking Garages will
be held for the benefit of all prospective proposers at 9:00 a.m. on October 16,
2017.
A pre-proposal conference will be held on October 16, 2017 at approximately
11:00 a.m. All potential proposers are urged to be present.
Project Questions and Answers
1. How many Project Team members does HFC expect proposers to provide?
Answer: HFC envisions a minimal, experienced Project Team equating to two full-
time positions for the duration of the eight-month term.
2. Will HFC provide office space for the Project Team?
Answer: Office space will not be provided; HFC will, however, make meeting space at
one or more of its operable facilities as needed. Note that jobsite trailers are not nec-
essary to perform services under this RFP.
3. How many meetings are needed with HFC, City of Houston officials, and their
contractors?
Answer: Regular, in-person meetings are an essential element of the project manage-
ment services required by HFC. HFC anticipates 5-8 meetings per week.
4. Is the project manager expected to be on-site at all times while construction activi-
ties are ongoing?
Answer: No.
5. Does HFC require use of any specific project-management software programs?
Answer: No
Table 12-2  Letters of clarification information from RFP (continued)
Project Procurement Management
525
price (20 percent weight). Notice the criteria provided in Table 12-1: Transmittal Letter
(15 percent); Project Team (25 percent); Experience (25 percent); Pricing (25 percent);
and Diversity (10 percent). The criteria should be specific and objective. For example, if
the buyer wants the supplier's project manager to be a certified Project Management Pro-
fessional (PMP), the procurement documents should state that requirement clearly and
follow it during the award process. Losing bidders may pursue legal recourse if the buyer
does not follow a fair and consistent evaluation process.
Organizations should heed the saying, "Let the buyer beware." It is critical to evaluate
proposals based on more than the professionalism of the paperwork submitted. A key factor
in evaluating bids, particularly for projects involving IT, is the past performance record of
the bidder. The RFP should require bidders to list other similar projects they have worked
on and provide customer references for those projects. Reviewing performance records and
references reduces the risk of selecting a supplier with a poor track record. Suppliers should
also demonstrate their understanding of the buyer's need, their technical and financial capa-
bilities, their management approach to the project, and their price for delivering the desired
goods and services. It is also crucial to write the contract to protect the buyer's interests.
Some IT projects also require potential sellers to deliver a technical presentation as
part of their proposal. The proposed project manager should lead the potential seller's
presentation team. When the outside project manager leads the proposal presentation, the
organization can build a relationship with the potential seller from the beginning. Visits to
contractor sites can also help the buyer get a better feeling for the seller's capabilities and
management style.
Conducting Procurements
After planning for procurement management, the next process involves deciding whom to
ask to do the work, sending appropriate documentation to potential sellers, obtaining pro-
posals or bids, selecting a seller, and awarding a contract. Prospective sellers do some of
the work in this process, normally at no cost to the buyer or project. The buying organiza-
tion is responsible for advertising the work, and for large procurements, the organization
often holds some sort of bidders' conference to answer questions about the job. Two of the
main outputs of this process are a selected seller and agreements.
Organizations can advertise to procure outside goods and services in many different
ways. Sometimes a specific supplier might be the top choice for the buyer. In this case,
the buyer gives procurement information just to that company. If the preferred supplier
responds favorably, the organizations proceed to work together. Many organizations have
formed good working relationships with certain suppliers.
In many cases, however, more than one supplier might be qualified to provide the
goods and services. Providing information to multiple sources and receiving bids from
them often takes advantage of the competitive business environment. Offshore outsourc-
ing, as you learned earlier, has increased tremendously as organizations find suitable sell-
ers around the globe. As a result of pursuing a competitive bidding strategy, the buyer can
receive better goods and services than expected at a lower price.
A bidders' conference, also called a supplier conference or pre-bid conference, is a
meeting with prospective sellers prior to preparation of their proposals or bids. These
Chapter 12
526
conferences help ensure that everyone has a clear, common understanding of the buyer's
desired products or services. In some cases, the bidders' conference might be held online
via a webcast or using other communications technology. Buyers will also post procure-
ment information on a website and post answers to frequently asked questions. Before,
during, or after the bidders' conference, the buyer may incorporate responses to questions
into the procurement documents as amendments. Notice that in the example in the previ-
ous section that the buyer added a pre-proposal conference and created several letters of
clarification for this fairly small procurement.
Once buyers receive proposals or bids, they can select a supplier or decide to cancel
the procurement. Selecting suppliers or sellers, often called source selection, involves
evaluating proposals or bids from sellers, choosing the best one, negotiating the contract,
and awarding the contract. It can be a long, tedious process, especially for large procure-
ments. Several stakeholders in the procurement process should be involved in selecting
the best supplier for the project. Often, teams of people are responsible for evaluating vari-
ous sections of the proposals. There might be a technical team, a management team, and
a cost team to focus on each major area. Buyers typically develop a short list of the top
three to five suppliers to reduce the work involved in selecting a source.
Experts in source selection highly recommend that buyers use formal proposal evalu-
ation sheets during source selection. Figure 12-4 provides a sample proposal evaluation
sheet that the project team might use to help create a short list of the best three to five
proposals. Notice that this example is a form of a weighted scoring model, as described in
Chapter 4, Project Integration Management. To calculate the score for a criterion, multiply
the weight of the criterion by the rating for the proposal. Add the scores to provide the
total weighted score for each proposal. The proposals with the highest weighted scores
should be included in the short list of possible sellers. Experts also recommend that tech-
nical criteria should not be given more weight than management or cost criteria. Many
organizations have suffered the consequences of paying too much attention to the techni-
cal aspects of proposals. For example, the project might cost much more than expected
or take longer to complete because the source selection team focused only on technical
aspects of proposals. Paying too much attention to these technical aspects is especially
likely to occur on IT projects. However, it is often the supplier's management team-not
the technical team-that makes procurement successful.
Figure 12-4  Sample proposal evaluation sheet
Proposal 1
Proposal 2
Proposal 3
Etc.
Criteria
Weight Rating Score Rating Score Rating Score
Technical approach
30%
90
27
80
24
70
21
Management
approach
30%
85
25.5
75
22.5
85
25.5
Past performance
20%
95
19
70
14
75
15
Price
20%
75
15
95
19
80
16
Total score
100%
86.5
79.5
77.5
Project Procurement Management
527
After developing a short list of possible sellers, organizations often follow a more detailed
proposal evaluation process. For example, they might list more detailed criteria for important
categories, such as the management approach. They might assign points for the potential
project manager's educational background and PMP certification, the seller's formal presen-
tation if it was part of the evaluation process, top management support for the project, and
the organization's project management methodologies. If the criteria and evaluation are done
well, the seller with the most points based on all of the criteria should be offered the contract.
It is customary to have contract negotiations during the source selection process. Sell-
ers on the short list are often asked to prepare a best and final offer (BAFO). In addition,
top managers from both the buying and selling organizations usually meet before making
final decisions. The final output is a contract that obligates the seller to provide the speci-
fied products or services and obligates the buyer to pay for them. For some projects, it is
also appropriate to prepare a contract management plan that describes how the contract
will be managed.
CONTROLLING PROCUREMENTS
Controlling procurements ensures that the seller's performance meets contractual require-
ments. The contractual relationship is a legal relationship, which means it is subject to
state and federal contract laws. It is very important that appropriate legal and contracting
professionals be involved in writing and administering contracts.
Ideally, the project manager, a project team member, or an active user in the project
should help write and administer the contract, so that everyone understands the impor-
tance of good procurement management. The project team should also seek expert advice
when working with contractual issues. Project team members must be aware of potential
legal problems they might cause by not understanding a contract. For example, most
projects involve changes, and these changes must be handled properly for items under
contract. Without understanding the provisions of the contract, a project manager may
unknowingly authorize a contractor to do additional work at greater costs. Therefore,
change control is an important part of the contract administration process.
A d v i c e f o r Y o u n g P r o f e s s i o n a l s
No matter how much money you have to spend, you should consider your criteria for
selecting what you plan to purchase. Too many people make impulse purchases or don't
take enough time to make important procurement decisions. For example, think about
some major purchases you have made or will make soon-where to live, what car to
drive, where to attend college, etc. Try creating an evaluation worksheet, focusing on the
criteria and their weights, for a recent purchase. Does it seem like you made the right
decision? Now think of a purchase you plan to make soon. Create an evaluation work-
sheet for that procurement, being careful to develop good criteria and weights.
Chapter 12
528
It is critical that project managers and team members watch for constructive change
orders. Constructive change orders are oral or written acts or omissions by someone with
actual or apparent authority that can be construed to have the same effect as a written
change order. For example, if a member of the buyer's project team has met with the con-
tractor on a weekly basis for three months to provide guidelines for performing work, the
team member can be viewed as an apparent authority. If the team member tells the con-
tractor to redo part of a report that has already been delivered and accepted by the project
manager, the action can be viewed as a constructive change order and the contractor can
legally bill the buyer for the additional work. Likewise, if the apparent authority tells the
contractor to skip parts of a critical review meeting in the interests of time, the omission
of that information is not the contractor's fault.
It is important to follow other good practices related to project procurement:

Changes to any part of the project need to be reviewed, approved, and
documented by the same people in the same way they approved the original
part of the plan.

Evaluation of any change should include an impact analysis. How will the
change affect the scope, time, cost, and quality of the goods or services
being provided? There must also be a baseline to understand and analyze
changes.

Changes must be documented in writing. Project team members should
document all important meetings and telephone calls.

When procuring complex information systems, project managers and their
teams must stay closely involved to make sure the new system will meet
business needs and work in an operational environment. Do not assume that
everything will go well because you hired a reputable supplier. The buying
organization needs to provide expertise as well.

Have backup plans in case the new system does not work as planned.

Several tools and techniques can help in contract administration, such as
a formal contract change control system, buyer-conducted procurement
performance reviews, inspections and audits, performance reporting,
payment systems, claims administration, and records management
systems.
Controlling procurement also involves closing procurements, which is sometimes
referred to as contract closure. Contract closure involves completion and settlement of
contracts and resolution of any open items. The project team should determine if all work
required in each contract was completed correctly and satisfactorily. The contract itself
should include requirements for formal acceptance and closure. The team should also
update records to reflect final results and archive information for future use.
Tools to assist in contract closure include procurement audits, negotiated settlements,
and a records management system. Procurement audits are often done during contract
closure to identify lessons learned in the entire procurement process. A records manage-
ment system provides the ability to easily organize, find, and archive procurement-related
Project Procurement Management
529
Ideally, all procurements should end in a negotiated settlement between the buyer
and the seller. If negotiation is not possible, then some type of alternate dispute resolution
such as mediation or arbitration can be used; if all else fails, litigation in courts can be
used to settle contracts.
Archiving information for future use is particularly important. Organizations should
strive to improve all of their business processes, including procurement management.
Archiving information, particularly in an automated records management system, sup-
ports efforts to improve procurement management.
Using Software to Assist in Project
Procurement Management
Over the years, organizations have used various types of productivity software to assist in
project procurement management. For example, most organizations use word-processing
software to write proposals or contracts, spreadsheet software to create proposal
evaluation worksheets, databases to track suppliers, and presentation software to present
procurement-related information.
B e s t P r a c t i c e
In today's fast-changing competitive environment, it isn't enough to follow traditional
procurement best practices. Instead, find innovative ways to improve the procurement
process. Mining completely different functional areas and technologies is a great way to
discover ideas that can be used to improve procurement. "Supply market intelligence
starts from procurement being intelligent about how business requirements can be
matched intelligently to what supply markets can offer. So, the greater your diversity
of knowledge of solutions from far flung areas, the better you'll be able to match supply
[solutions] to demand [requirements]." The following examples illustrate some ideas of
how to make procurement more intelligent:

Data scientists build predictive models to analyze big data related to finance,
marketing, etc. Why not model procurement processes?

Behavioral economists know that people do not act rationally. Why not apply
irrationality to your advantage in negotiations?

Quality control/assurance departments encourage employees to suggest quality
improvements all the time. Why not enable your workers to be on the lookout
for additional new and innovative suppliers?

Crowdsourcing solicits ideas from a large group of people. Can it apply to some
of your organization's procurements?13
documents. It is often an automated system, or at least partially automated, because a
large amount of information can be related to project procurement.
Chapter 12
530
Many companies are now using more advanced software to assist in procurement
management. The term e-procurement often describes various procurement functions
that are now done electronically, as follows:

Web-based ERP (Electronic Resource Planning): Creating and approving
purchasing requisitions, placing purchase orders, and receiving goods and
services by using a software system based on Internet technology.

E-MRO (Maintenance, Repair, and Overhaul): The same as web-based ERP,
except that the goods and services ordered are MRO supplies that are not
related to a particular product.

E-sourcing: Identifying new suppliers for a specific category of purchasing
requirements using Internet technology.

E-tendering: Sending requests for information and prices to suppliers and
receiving the responses of suppliers using Internet technology.

E-reverse auctioning: Using Internet technology to buy goods and services
from a number of known or unknown suppliers.

E-informing: Gathering and distributing purchasing information with inter-
nal and external parties using Internet technology.

E-marketsites: Expands on web-based ERP to open up value chains. Buying
communities can access preferred suppliers' products and services, add to
shopping carts, create requisitions, seek approval, receive purchase orders,
and process electronic invoices with integration to suppliers' supply chains
and buyers' financial systems.
Many websites and software tools can assist in procurement functions. For example,
most business travelers use the web to purchase airline tickets and to reserve rental cars
and hotel rooms for business trips. With the rise of applications for smartphones, shoppers
can even take pictures of barcodes on all types of products and compare prices of compet-
ing stores to confirm that they are getting the best deal. Likewise, many organizations can
purchase items online, or they can buy specialized software to help streamline their pro-
curement activities.
One type of software that is particularly useful for streamlining procurement is the
procure-to-pay suite, which provides support for indirect procurements. Unlike direct pro-
curement, where procurement experts in organizations acquire raw materials and goods for
production or services related to their organization's primary business, indirect procurement
involves acquiring supplies and services required to keep the day-to-day business functioning,
such as equipment repairs, office supplies, and services related to keeping business processes
running. According to Gartner, the procurement process has evolved from paper-intensive
order processing to a strategic enterprise function. Their qualitative analysis of the procure-
to-pay suites market makes the point that because self-service software tools are available,
employees at all levels of an organization can buy goods and services without the need for
professional procurement expertise. This streamlines the process for indirect procurements,
so that procurement experts can focus on the more strategic direct procurements. The four
main capabilities of procure-to-pay suites for indirect procurements include the following:

E-purchasing functionality: Provides a self-service solution to requisition
and order goods and services through the use of catalogs, e-forms, or free-text
orders (for when users cannot find items in a structured format).
Project Procurement Management
531

Catalog management capabilities: Includes catalog content upload, content
update evaluation tools, and catalog search tools.

E-invoicing: Enables the interchange and storage of legally valid invoices in
electronic format.

Accounts Payable Invoice Automation (APIA): Allows approval and control
of incoming invoices through either automatic or manual approvals by auto-
matic workflows.
At current software suite prices, organizations with annual revenues of $800 million or
more usually realize a good return on investment from using these tools. Gartner's research
identified Ariba (SAP), Coupa, Basware, and SciQuest as market leaders in 2015.14
Organizations can also take advantage of information available on the web, in indus-
try publications, or in various discussion groups offering advice on selecting suppliers. For
example, many organizations invest millions of dollars in enterprise project management
software. Before deciding which seller's software to use, organizations use the Internet to
find product information provided by various suppliers, prices, case studies, and current
customers to assist in making procurement decisions. Buyers can also use the Internet
to hold bidders' conferences, as you learned earlier in this chapter, or to communicate
procurement-related information.
As with any information or software tool, organizations must focus on using the infor-
mation and tools to meet project and organizational needs. Many nontechnical issues are
often involved in getting the most value out of new technologies, especially new e-procure-
ment software. For example, organizations must often develop partnerships and strategic
alliances with other organizations to take advantage of potential cost savings. Organiza-
tions should practice good procurement management in selecting new software tools and
managing relationships with the chosen suppliers.
Considerations for Agile/Adaptive Environments
The PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition provides the following information for project procure-
ment management:
In agile environments, specific sellers may be used to extend the team. This collabora-
tive working relationship can lead to a shared risk procurement model where both the
buyer and the seller share in the risk and rewards associated with a project.
Larger projects may use an adaptive approach for some deliverables and a more stable
approach for other parts. In these cases, a governing agreement such as a master
services agreement (MSA) may be used for the overall engagement, with the adaptive
work being placed in an appendix or supplement. This allows changes to occur on the
adaptive cope without impacting the overall contract.15
Recall that the Agile Manifesto values customer collaboration over contract negotia-
tion, setting an important tone for procurement relationships on agile projects. The buyer
and seller should work together to create the required products and services throughout
the entire procurement process. Another goal of agile/adaptive environments is speed.
Several procurements, however, take time. You cannot always find skilled personnel, office
space, hardware, equipment, and other resources at the last minute. Some items take
Chapter 12
532
weeks or even months to procure. It's important for project managers and senior manag-
ers to plan for those procurement needs in advance.
The processes of project procurement management follow a clear, logical sequence.
However, many project managers are not familiar with the issues involved in purchasing
goods and services from other organizations. If projects will benefit by procuring goods or
services, then project managers and their teams must follow good project procurement
management. As outsourcing for IT projects increases, it is important for all project man-
agers to have a fundamental understanding of this knowledge area.
C a s e W r a p - U p
After reading the contract for her company's consultants carefully, Marie McBride found
a clause giving her company the right to terminate the contract with a one-week notice.
She met with her project team to get suggestions. The team still needed help completing
the system conversion project. One team member had a friend who worked for a com-
peting consulting firm. The competing firm had experienced people available, and their
fees were lower than those in the current contract. Marie asked this team member to
help her research other consulting firms that could work on the conversion project. She
then requested bids from these companies. She personally interviewed people from the
top three suppliers' management teams and checked their references for similar projects.
Marie worked with the purchasing department to terminate the original contract and
issue a new one with a new consulting firm that had a much better reputation and lower
hourly rates. This time, she made certain the contract included a statement of work,
specific deliverables, and requirements for the minimum experience level of consultants
provided. The contract also included incentive fees for completing the conversion work
within a certain time period. Marie had learned the importance of good project procure-
ment management.
Project Procurement Management
533
Chapter Summary
Procurement, purchasing, or outsourcing is the acquisition of goods and services from an out-
side source. IT outsourcing continues to grow, both within an organization's own country and off-
shore. Organizations outsource to reduce costs, focus on their core business, access skills and
technologies, provide flexibility, and increase accountability. It is becoming increasingly important
for IT professionals to understand project procurement management.
Project procurement management includes planning procurement management and then
conducting and controlling procurements.
Planning procurement management involves deciding what to procure or outsource, what
type of contract to use, and how to describe the effort in a statement of work. Make-or-buy
analysis helps an organization determine whether it can procure a product or service at a
reasonable cost. Project managers should consult with internal and external experts to assist
them with procurement planning because many legal, organizational, and financial issues are
often involved.
The basic types of contracts are fixed price, cost reimbursable, and time and material. Fixed-
price contracts involve a fixed total price for a well-defined product and entail the least risk to
buyers. Cost-reimbursable contracts involve payments to suppliers for direct and indirect actual
costs and require buyers to absorb some of the risk. Time and material contracts are a hybrid of
fixed-price and cost-reimbursable contracts, and are commonly used by consultants. Unit pricing
involves paying suppliers a predetermined amount per unit of service and imposes different levels
of risk on buyers, depending on how the contract is written. It is important to decide which con-
tract type is most appropriate for a particular procurement. All contracts should include specific
clauses that address unique aspects of a project and that describe termination requirements.
A statement of work (SOW) describes the work required for the procurement in enough
detail to allow prospective suppliers to determine if they can provide the goods and services and
to determine an appropriate price.
Conducting procurements involves obtaining seller responses, selecting sellers, and award-
ing contracts. Organizations should use a formal proposal evaluation form when evaluating
suppliers. Technical criteria should not be given more weight than management or cost criteria
during evaluation.
Controlling procurements involves managing relationships with sellers, monitoring contract
performance, making changes as needed, and closing out contracts. The project manager and
key team members should be involved in writing and administering the contract. Project man-
agers must be aware of potential legal problems they might cause if they do not understand a
contract. Project managers and teams should use change control procedures when working with
outside contracts and should be especially careful about constructive change orders.
Several types of software can assist in project procurement management. E-procurement
software helps organizations save money in procuring various goods and services. Organiza-
tions can also use the web, industry publications, and discussion groups to research and com-
pare various suppliers.
Be sure to consider how project integration management can differ in agile/adaptive
environments.
Chapter 12
534
Discussion Questions
1. List five reasons why organizations outsource. When should an organization choose not to
outsource? Why are some organizations moving their software development work back in-
house? Why are some organizations beginning to use onshoring?
2. Explain the make-or-buy decision process and describe how to perform the financial calcula-
tions in the simple lease-or-buy example provided in this chapter.
3. What are the main types of contracts if you decide to outsource? What are the advantages
and disadvantages of each?
4. Do you think many IT professionals have experience writing RFPs and evaluating proposals
for IT projects? What skills would be useful for these tasks?
5. How do organizations decide whom to send RFPs or RFQs?
6. How can organizations use a weighted scoring model to evaluate proposals as part of seller
selection?
7. List two suggestions for ensuring adequate change control on projects that involve outside
contracts.
8. What is the main purpose of a procurement audit?
9. How can software assist in procuring goods and services? What is e-procurement software?
Do you see any ethical issues with e-procurement? For example, should stores be able to
block people with smartphones from taking pictures of barcodes to do comparison shopping?
Quick Quiz
1. What is the largest spending category for global outsourcing of IT services?
a.
Communications services
b.
Devices
c.
Enterprise software
d.
Data center systems
2. Your organization hired a specialist in a certain field to provide training for a short period of
time. Which reason for outsourcing would this example fall under?
a.
Reducing costs
b.
Allowing the client organization to focus on its core business
c.
Accessing skills and technologies
d.
Providing flexibility
3. In which project procurement management process is an RFP often written?
a.
Planning procurement management
b.
Conducting procurements
c.
Controlling procurements
d.
Selecting sellers
Project Procurement Management
535
4. An item you need for a project has a daily lease cost of $200. If you decide to purchase the
item, the investment cost is $6,000 and the daily cost is $100. After how many days will the
lease cost be the same as the purchase cost?
a.
30
b.
40
c.
50
d.
60
5. Which type of contract has the least amount of risk for the buyer?
a.
fixed-price
b.
cost plus incentive fee (CPIF)
c.
time and material
d.
cost plus fixed fee (CPFF)
6. The
is the point at which the contractor assumes total responsibility for each
additional dollar of contract cost.
a.
breakeven point
b.
Share Ratio Point
c.
Point of Reconciliation
d.
Point of Total Assumption
7. If your college or university wanted to get information from potential sellers for provid-
ing a new sports stadium, what type of document would be required of the potential
sellers?
a.
RFP
b.
RFQ
c.
Proposal
d.
Quote
8. Buyers often prepare a
list when selecting a seller to make the process
more manageable.
a.
preferred
b.
short
c.
qualified suppliers
d.
BAFO
9. A proposal evaluation sheet is an example of a(n)
.
a.
RFP
b.
NPV analysis
c.
earned value analysis
d.
weighted scoring model
Chapter 12
536
10.
is a term used to describe various procurement functions that are now done
electronically.
a.
E-procurement
b.
eBay
c.
E-commerce
d.
EMV
Quick Quiz Answers
1. b; 2. c; 3. a; 4. d; 5. a; 6. d; 7. c; 8. b; 9. d; 10. a
Exercises
1. Search the Internet for the term IT outsourcing and find at least two articles that discuss
outsourcing. Summarize the articles and answer the following questions:

What are the main types of goods and services being outsourced?

Why are the organizations in the articles choosing to outsource?

Have the organizations in the articles benefited from outsourcing? Why or why not?
2. Interview someone who was involved in an IT procurement process, such as a man-
ager in your organization's IT department, and have the person explain the process
that was followed. Alternatively, find an article describing an IT procurement in an
organization. Write a paper describing the procurement and any lessons learned by
the organization.
3. Suppose that your company is trying to decide whether it should buy special equipment to
prepare high-quality publications itself or lease the equipment from another company. Sup-
pose that leasing the equipment costs $240 per day. If you decide to purchase the equip-
ment, the initial investment is $6,800, and operations will cost $70 per day. After how many
days will the lease cost be the same as the purchase cost for the equipment? Assume that
your company would only use this equipment for 30 days. Should your company buy the
equipment or lease it?
4. Search online for samples of IT contracts. Use search phrases like "IT contract" or "sample
contract." Analyze the key features of the contract. What type of contract was used, and
why? Review the language and clauses in the contract. What are some of the key clauses?
List questions you have about the contract and try to get answers from someone who is
familiar with contracts.
5. Review a sample RFP for an IT project. Write a paper summarizing the purpose of the RFP
and how well you think it describes the work required.
6. Draft the source selection criteria that might be used for evaluating proposals to provide
smartphones with wireless plans for all students, faculty, and staff at your college or univer-
sity or to all business professionals in your organization. Use Figure 12-4 as a guide. Include
at least five criteria, and make the total weights add up to 100. Write a paper explaining and
justifying the criteria and their weights.
Project Procurement Management
537
Running Case
As described in earlier chapters, your Global Treps team would pay for a new website and account
through an online provider. Bobby would do most of the customization and programming for the
site, but you would consider outsourcing or purchasing services to provide some of the capabilities
like accepting donations and developing the short videos on the site. You would also buy a new
laptop and Internet access for your three team members abroad, which they could share with their
contacts in those countries. You have budgeted $20,000 for outsourced hardware and software.
The activities listed in your WBS for outsourced software development include the following:
1.3.1.1  Domain name and site hosting
1.3.1.2  Donation acceptance feature of website
1.3.1.3  Video creation for website
1. Bobby is very familiar with purchasing domain names and site hosting and has already
looked into options for providing the donation acceptance feature. However, you all agree
that you need professionals to create the videos for the website. Brainstorm options for this
procurement, and research potential suppliers. Summarize your findings in a short paper,
and include at least three references.
2. Draft a contract statement of work for creating the videos for the website. Use the outline
provided in Figure 12-3.
3. Assume that the source selection criteria for creating the videos for the website are as follows:

Management approach, 15 percent

Technical approach, 25 percent

Past performance, 10 percent

Price, 20 percent

Sample videos, 30 percent
Using Figure 12-4 and the weighted scoring model template as guides, create a spreadsheet
that could be used to enter ratings and calculate scores for each criterion and total weighted
scores for three proposals. Enter scores for Proposal 1 as 80, 75, 70, 90, and 85, respectively.
Enter scores for Proposal 2 as 90, 50, 95, 80, and 75. Enter scores for Proposal 3 as 80, 90,
95, 80, and 75. Add a paragraph to the spreadsheet that summarizes the results and your
recommendation. Print your results on one page.
4. Draft potential clauses that you could include in the contract to provide incentives and/or
penalties for on-time and within-budget delivery of high-quality videos that users would
enjoy watching. Be creative in your response, and document your ideas in a short paper. Be
sure to describe how you will measure if the criteria were met and what the incentives and/
or penalties would be.
Key Terms
bid
constructive change orders
contract
cost plus award fee (CPAF) contract
cost plus fixed fee (CPFF) contract
cost plus incentive fee (CPIF) contract
Chapter 12
538
cost plus percentage of costs (CPPC) contract
cost-reimbursable contracts
fixed-price contract
lump-sum contract
make-or-buy decision
Point of Total Assumption (PTA)
procurement
project procurement management
proposal
Request for Proposal (RFP)
Request for Quote (RFQ)
sellers
statement of work (SOW)
termination clause
time and material (T&M) contracts
unit pricing
Endnotes

1 Gartner, Inc., "Gartner Says Global IT Spending to Reach $3.7 Trillion in 2018" (October 3,
2017).

2 Deloitte Consulting LLP, "2016 Global Outsourcing Survey" (June 2016).

3 Issie Lapowsky, "Urban Onshoring: The Movement to Bring Tech Jobs Back to America,"
wired.com (November 4, 2014).

4 Andy Bork, "Soft Skills Needed in a Hard World," Minneapolis Star Tribune (May 24, 2004).

5 Lisa Stiffler, "Working Geek: CIO Luke Friang's need for speed keeps pace with Zulily's
quick deals," GeekWire (January 30, 2018).

6 Scott McNealy, "The Future of the Net: Why We Don't Want You to Buy Our Software,"
Sun Executive Perspectives, www.sun.com/dot-com/perspectives/stop.html
(Sun Microsystems, Inc., 1999): 1.

7 David M. Halbfinger, "City Hall Admits Mishandling Technology Projects," The New York
Times (October 31, 2011).

8 Stan Beer, "Is going offshore good for Australia?" The Age (September 21, 2004).

9 Chris Pash, "The jobs most in demand in Australia for 2018," Business Insider Australia
(February 13, 2018).

10 Robert Antonio, "The Fixed-Price Incentive Firm Target Contract: Not As Firm As the Name
Suggests," WIFCON.com (November 2003).

11 Dick Rohland, "I-35W Bridge Completion Brings Closure to Minneapolis,"
ConstructionEquipmentGuide.com (October 4, 2008).

12 Stephanie Overby, "10 Outsourcing Trends to Watch in 2015," CIO.com (January 5, 2015).

13 Pierre Mitchell, "Procurement Must Stretch Beyond 'Procurement Best Practices', "
Chief Procurement Officer (January 21, 2015), spendmatters.com/cpo/
procurement-must-stretch-beyond-procurement-best-practices/.

14 Magnus Bergfors, Paolo Malinverno, and Deborah R. Wilson, "Magic Quadrant for Procure-
to-Pay Suites for Indirect Procurement," Gartner (March 24, 2015).

15 Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge
(PMBOK Guide) - Sixth Edition (2017), p. 465.
C h a p t e r 13
Project Stakeholder
Management
L e a r n i n g O b j e c t i v e s
After reading this chapter, you will be able to:

Explain the importance of project stakeholder management throughout
the life of a project

Discuss the process of identifying stakeholders, how to create a stake-
holder register, and how to perform a stakeholder analysis

Describe the contents of a stakeholder engagement plan

Describe the process of managing stakeholder engagement

Explain methods for monitoring stakeholder engagement

Discuss types of software available to assist in project stakeholder
management

Discuss considerations for agile/adaptive environments
Chapter 13
540
The Importance Of Project Stakeholder Management
As you learned in Chapter 1, stakeholders are an important part of the project manage-
ment framework. Stakeholders request projects, approve them, reject them, support them,
and oppose them. Because stakeholder management is so important to project success,
the Project Management Institute decided to create an entire knowledge area devoted to
it in 2013. Many of the concepts related to communications and resource management
also apply to stakeholder management, but unique activities are required to perform good
stakeholder management. The purpose of project stakeholder management is to identify
all people or organizations affected by a project, to analyze stakeholder expectations,
and to effectively engage stakeholders in project decisions throughout the life of a proj-
ect. Project managers and their teams must have a good dialogue with stakeholders and
address issues as they occur to ensure stakeholder satisfaction.
Projects often cause changes in organizations, and some people may lose their jobs
when a project is completed. For example, a project might create a new system that
makes some jobs obsolete, or a project might result in outsourcing work to an external
O p e n i n g C a s e
Debra Hughes took the risk of becoming an independent consultant after working her
way up the corporate ladder for 10 years. Her last firm was downsizing and cut her entire
strategic IT consulting department, but the firm offered her a transfer that would require
her to travel about 80 percent of the time. With two small children, she did not want to
travel, so she jumped at the chance to work independently. One of her colleagues knew
an IT director at a local oil company, and he offered her a contract that paid three times
what she received as an employee. The problem was that the initial contract was only
for two weeks. However, after she proved her value by successfully managing the first
project, the company kept her on, giving her bigger and bigger projects to manage. Her
current project was to evaluate and then implement a project management software
solution so the new VP of Operations, Stephen, could oversee the upgrade of oil refiner-
ies in several countries. The refinery upgrades were estimated to cost over $200 million.
Debra worked with an internal analyst, Ryan, and Stephen to determine requirements
and their approach to choosing a new software solution. They needed to award a con-
tract to a supplier within two months and then integrate the new system with their other
systems, especially the accounting systems, as quickly as possible.
Unfortunately, Chien, the IT director who hired Debra and authorized her paycheck
every week, was very upset with her recommendation. He called her into his office and
started yelling at her. "How could you make this recommendation? You know it goes
against what I think is best for IT at this company. Ryan made a totally different recom-
mendation than you did. You consultants think you can come in and shake things up,
not worrying about what happens to us after you're gone. Get out of here before I say
something I shouldn't!" Debra quietly left Chien's office, worrying about what to do next.
She knew that her recommendation would please Stephen and be in the best interest
of the entire company, even though it was not the choice that Chien and Ryan were
promoting.
Project Stakeholder Management
541
group to make the organization more efficient. The project managers might be viewed as
enemies by these stakeholders and other negatively affected stakeholders. By contrast,
some people may view project managers as allies if they lead a project that increases prof-
its, produces new jobs, or increases pay for certain stakeholders. In any case, project man-
agers must learn to identify, understand, and work with a variety of stakeholders.
W h a t W e n t W r o n g ?
Changing the way work is done can send a shock wave through an organization, leaving
many people afraid and even thinking about ways to stop or sabotage a project. Donald
White, founder and program manager at Defense Systems Leaders in Washington, D.C.,
described situations that can lead to project sabotage:

Buy-in blues: Top-down support and early buy-in for projects is crucial. Allow-
ing negativity to fester will decrease the likelihood of project success. Deal with
protesters early.

Short-term profits: Cutting costs by any means possible for immediate payoff
will sacrifice the future health of an organization and its employees. Avoid
projects that focus only on the short term.

Overachieving: Trying to do too many things at the same time introduces
waste and significantly slows down progress. Focus on the most important
projects first.

Lack of respect: "Disrespect people, and they will retaliate with apathy, bore-
dom, absenteeism, make-work [performing tasks of little importance to keep
busy], outright sabotage and other maladies. Disrespect customers, and they'll
find someone who will treat them better."1
The four processes in project stakeholder management include the following:
1. Identifying stakeholders involves identifying everyone involved in the proj-
ect or affected by it and determining the best ways to manage relationships
with them. The main output of this process is a stakeholder register.
2. Planning stakeholder engagement involves determining strategies to effec-
tively engage stakeholders in project decisions and activities based on their
needs, interests, and potential impact. The output of this process is a stake-
holder engagement plan.
3. Managing stakeholder engagement involves communicating and working
with project stakeholders to satisfy their needs and expectations, resolving
issues, and fostering engagement in project decisions and activities. The out-
puts of this process change requests, project management plan updates, and
project documents updates.
4. Monitoring stakeholder engagement involves monitoring stakeholder rela-
tionships and adjusting plans and strategies for engaging stakeholders as
needed. Outputs of this process are work performance information, change
requests, project management plan updates, and project documents updates.
Chapter 13
542
Figure 13-1 summarizes the inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of project
stakeholder management.
Identifying Stakeholders
Recall from Chapter 1 that stakeholders are the people involved in project activities
or affected by them. The PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition, describes an emerging trend
as follows: "Broader definitions of stakeholders are being developed that expand the
traditional categories of employees, suppliers, and shareholders to include groups such as
regulators, lobby groups, environmentalists, financial organizations, the media, and those
who simply believe they are stakeholders-they perceive that they will be affected by the
work or outcomes of the project."2 Stakeholders can be internal to the organization or
external.

Internal project stakeholders generally include the project sponsor, project
team, support staff, and internal customers for the project. Other internal
stakeholders include top management, other functional managers, and other
project managers because organizations have limited resources.

External project stakeholders include the project's customers (if they are
external to the organization), competitors, suppliers, and other external
groups that are potentially involved in the project or affected by it, such as
government officials and concerned citizens.
Figure 13-1  Project stakeholder management overview
13.1 Identify
Stakeholders
13.2 Plan Stakeholder
Engagement
13.3 Manage Stakeholder
Engagement
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Enterprise environmental
factors
.4 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Communication skills
.3 Interpersonal and team
skills
.4 Ground rules
.5 Meetings
.3 Outputs
.1 Change requests
.2 Project management
plan updates
.3 Project documents
updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Project documents
.3 Work performance data
.4 Enterprise environmental
factors
.5 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Data analysis
.2 Decision making
.3 Data representation
.4 Communication skills
.5 Interpersonal and team
skills
.6 Meetings
.3 Outputs
.1 Work performance
information
.2 Change requests
.3 Project management
plan updates
.4 Project documents
updates
.1 Inputs
.1 Project charter
.2 Project management plan
.3 Project documents
.4 Agreements
.5 Enterprise environmental
factors
.6 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Data gathering
.3 Data analysis
.4 Decision making
.5 Data representation
.6 Meetings
.3 Outputs
.1 Stakeholder engagement
plan
.1 Inputs
.1 Project charter
.2 Business documents
.3 Project management plan
.4 Project documents
.5 Agreements
.6 Enterprise environmental
factors
.7 Organizational process
assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Data gathering
.3 Data analysis
.4 Data representation
.5 Meetings
.3 Outputs
.1 Stakeholder register
.2 Change requests
.3 Project management
plan updates
.4 Project documents
updates
13.4 Monitor Stakeholder
Engagement
Project Stakeholder
Management Overview
Source: PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition. Project Management Institute, Inc. (2017). Copyright and
all rights reserved. Material from this publication has been reproduced with permission of PMI.
Project Stakeholder Management
543
Peter Gilliland, a project management tutor and skills coach in the United Kingdom,
offers an even more detailed list of potential stakeholders for a project:

Program director

Program manager

Project manager

Project manager's family

Sponsor

Customer

Performing organization

Other employees of the organization

Labor unions

Project team members

Project management office

Governance board

Suppliers

Governmental regulatory agencies

Competitors

Potential customers with an interest in the project

Groups representing consumer, environmental, or other interests

Groups or individuals who are competing for limited resources

Groups or individuals who are pursuing goals that conflict with those of the
project3
Recall that the ultimate goal of project management is to meet or exceed stakeholder
needs and expectations for a project. To do that, you must first identify your particular
project stakeholders. Identifying some stakeholders is obvious, but others might be
more difficult to identify. For example, some competitors outside the organization or
even inside it might be opposed to the project without the project manager's knowledge.
Stakeholders also might change during a project due to employee turnover, partnerships,
and other events. It is important to use formal and informal communications networks to
make sure that all key stakeholders are identified.
It is also necessary to focus on stakeholders with the most direct ties to the project. For
example, if you listed every single supplier for goods and services used on a project, you would
be wasting precious time and resources. If a supplier is just providing an off-the-shelf product,
it should need little if any attention. However, if a supplier is providing a customized product
or service that is critical to the project's success, the supplier deserves much more attention.
A simple way to document basic information on project stakeholders is by creating
a stakeholder register. This document can take various forms and include the following
information:

Identification information: The stakeholders' names, positions, locations,
roles in the project, and contact information

Assessment information: The stakeholders' major requirements and expecta-
tions, potential influences, and phases of the project in which stakeholders
have the most interest

Stakeholder classification: Is the stakeholder internal or external to the
organization? Is the stakeholder a supporter of the project or resistant to it?
Chapter 13
544
Table 13-1 provides an example of part of the stakeholder register for the project
described in the chapter's opening case. Notice that it includes only basic stakeholder
information, such as name, position, whether stakeholders are internal or external to the
organization, their role on the project, and contact information. Because this document is
available to other people in the organization, the project manager must be careful not to
include sensitive information, such as how strongly the stakeholders support the project or
how much power they have. Also notice that some stakeholders, such as the project man-
ager's husband and children, are not included on this list, even though they are important
stakeholders to Debra!
A stakeholder analysis is a technique for analyzing information to determine
which stakeholders' interests to focus on and how to increase stakeholder support
throughout the project. After identifying key project stakeholders, you can use differ-
ent classification models to determine an approach for managing stakeholder relation-
ships. Be careful to control access to this often sensitive information. For example,
you can create a power/interest grid to group stakeholders based on their level of
authority (power) and their level of concern (interest) for project outcomes, as shown
in Figure 13-2. You should manage relationships very closely with stakeholders 1 and 2
in this example because they have high interest and high power, especially stakeholder 1.
You should keep stakeholders 3 and 4 informed because they have high interest but
low power. Stakeholders 5 and 6 should be kept satisfied, perhaps by brief updates on
the project, because they have low interest but high power. You should spend the least
amount of effort by simply monitoring stakeholders 7 and 8, who both have low inter-
est and low power.
Name
Position
Internal/
External
Project Role
Contact Information
Stephen
VP of Operations
Internal
Project sponsor
stephen@globaloil.com
Betsy
CFO
Internal
Senior manager,
approves funds
betsy@globaloil.com
Chien
CIO
Internal
Senior manager,
PM's boss
chien@globaloil.com
Ryan
IT analyst
Internal
Team member
ryan@globaloil.com
Lori
Director, Accounting
Internal
Senior manager
lori@globaloil.com
Sanjay
Director, Refineries
Internal
Senior manager
of largest refinery
sanjay@globaloil.com
Debra
Consultant
External
Project manager
debra@gmail.com
Suppliers
Suppliers
External
Supply software
suppliers@gmail.com
Table 13-1  Sample stakeholder register
Project Stakeholder Management
545
It is also important to measure the engagement level of stakeholders throughout the
project. You can categorize stakeholders as being one of the following:

Unaware: Unaware of the project and its potential impacts on them

Resistant: Aware of the project yet resistant to change

Neutral: Aware of the project yet neither supportive nor resistant

Supportive: Aware of the project and supportive of change

Leading: Aware of the project and its potential impacts and actively engaged
in helping it succeed
The project team should take corrective action if stakeholders with high interest
and high power are also categorized as resistant or unaware. If they are unaware, setting
up a short meeting to discuss the importance of the project would be appropriate. The
project manager could ask the project sponsor or another senior manager to participate
in the meeting. If stakeholders are resistant to the project, you would definitely want
a senior-level manager to talk to them directly to understand the reasons for their
resistance and develop a strategy to handle potential conflicts. Another common problem
with stakeholders, especially project sponsors, is that they support a project but have
unreasonable expectations. It can be difficult to say "no" to them, as described in the
What Went Right? feature.
Figure 13-2  Power/interest grid
1
2
3
4
7
8
Low
Interest
High
High
Power
Low
High interest/high power
Manage closely
Low interest/low power
Monitor
High interest/low power
Keep informed
Low interest/high power
Keep satisﬁed
5
6
Source: Kathy Schwalbe, An Introduction to Project Management,
Fourth Edition (2012)
Chapter 13
546
Planning Stakeholder Engagement
After identifying and analyzing stakeholders, the project manager and team should
develop a stakeholder engagement plan to help them effectively engage stakeholders and
make sure that good decisions are made throughout the life of the project. This plan may
be formal or informal, based on the needs of the project.
In addition to information found in the stakeholder register, such as stakeholder iden-
tification information, assessment information, and classification, a stakeholder engage-
ment plan can include the following:

Current and desired engagement levels: If these levels are not the same, the
project team should develop a strategy to align engagement levels.

Interrelationships between stakeholders: As you learned in earlier chap-
ters, there are many interrelationships between project activities and
stakeholders. The project manager must be in tune with the politics of the
organization.

Communication requirements: The communications management plan
should specify stakeholder requirements, and the stakeholder register can
expand on unique requests from specific people.

Potential management strategies for each stakeholder: This critical section
can contain very sensitive information.

Methods for updating the stakeholder management plan: All plans need
some process for handling changes and updates. Flexibility would be impor-
tant as stakeholders change on the project.
Because a stakeholder management plan often includes sensitive information, it
should not be part of the official project documents, which are normally available for
all stakeholders to review. In many cases, only project managers and a few other team
W h a t W e n t R i g h t ?
Instead of just saying "no" when your project sponsor asks for something unreasonable,
it is better to explain what is wrong with the request and then present a realistic way
to solve the problem at hand. For example, Christa Ferguson, a PMP and independent
program manager in San Francisco, described how she handled a request from a project
sponsor to deliver a new tablet device in two months when she knew she would need
more time. Based on her experience, she knew the Request for Quote for the effort alone
would take almost a month. Christa quickly researched the facts to propose a realistic
delivery schedule.
"I created a timeline for the request for quotation and requested the companies
quoting the job to include a breakdown of the work required with a high-level schedule.
Then we could see the project was going to take at least six months to complete. By
creating a factual, data-driven picture of the situation, I didn't have to explain anything
other than what work had to be done and how long it would take. Our sponsor reset
expectations once he learned what it took to produce the tablets."4
Project Stakeholder Management
547
members should prepare the stakeholder management plan. In many cases, parts of
the stakeholder management plan are not written down, and if they are, distribution is
strictly limited.5
Table 13-2 provides an example of parts of a stakeholder management plan that
Debra could use to help manage project stakeholders in this chapter's opening case. It is
important for project managers to take the time to develop this plan, which helps them
meet stakeholder needs and expectations. In addition, as new stakeholders are added to
Name
Power/Interest
Current
Engagement
Potential Management Strategies
Stephen
High/high
Leading
Stephen can seem intimidating due to his
physical stature and deep voice, but he has
a great personality and sense of humor. He
previously led a similar refinery upgrade
program at another company and knows
what he wants. Manage closely and ask for
his advice as needed. He likes short, fre-
quent updates in person.
Chien
High/medium
Resistant
Chien is a very organized yet hardheaded
man. He has been pushing corporate IT
standards, and the system the PM and
sponsor (Debra and Stephen) like best
goes against those standards, even though
it's the best solution for this project and
the company as a whole. Need to convince
him that this is okay and that people still
respect his work and position.
Ryan
Medium/high
Supportive
Ryan has been with the company for several
years and is well respected, but he feels
threatened by Debra. He also resents her
getting paid more than he does. He wants to
please his boss, Chien, first and foremost.
Need to convince him that the suggested
solution is in everyone's best interest.
Betsy
High/low
Neutral
Very professional, logical person. Gets
along well with Chien. She has supported
Debra in approving past projects with
strong business cases. Provide detailed
financial justification for the suggested
solution to keep her satisfied. Also ask her
to talk to Chien on Debra's behalf.
Table 13-2  Sample stakeholder analysis
Chapter 13
548
the project and more information is provided, the plan should be updated. For example,
once a supplier is selected for a project, specific supplier names and other information can
be added to the list.
Managing Stakeholder Engagement
Project managers must understand and work with various stakeholders; therefore, they
should specifically address how to use various communications methods and their inter-
personal and management skills to engage stakeholders. Recall that project success is
often measured in different ways, such as meeting scope, time, and cost goals. Many prac-
titioners, however, define project success as satisfying the customer or sponsor, knowing
that it's rare to meet scope, time, and cost goals without modifying at least one goal.
Project sponsors can usually rank scope, time, and cost goals in order of importance
and provide guidelines on how to balance the triple constraint. This ranking can be shown
in an expectations management matrix, which can help clarify expectations. For example,
Table 13-3 shows part of an expectations management matrix that Debra could use to help
manage key stakeholders from the chapter's opening case. The expectations management
matrix includes a list of measures of success as well as priorities, expectations, and guide-
lines related to each measure. You could add other measures of success, such as meeting
quality expectations, achieving a certain customer satisfaction rating, and meeting ROI
projections after the project is completed, to meet individual project needs. The challenge
comes when key stakeholders disagree on priorities. For example, Stephen wants a sys-
tem that will meet his requirements, so scope is most important to him. Chien wants to
enforce corporate standards, so technology/standards are most important to him. Project
managers must acknowledge these different priorities and make the tough decisions about
what to do. In this example, Debra believes that Stephen's priorities are most important to
the company as a whole, even though it might hurt her relationship with Chien.
Understanding the stakeholders' expectations can help in managing issues. If the proj-
ect manager knows that cost is not as high a priority as the schedule, it shouldn't be diffi-
cult to ask the project sponsor for needed funds, as long as the request makes sense.
Issues should be documented in an issue log, a tool used to document, monitor, and
track issues that need resolution. Unresolved issues can be a major source of conflict and
result in stakeholder expectations not being met. Note that PMI lists issue logs as an out-
put of Project Integration Management, and updating it (one of several project documents
updates) is an important output of Project Stakeholder Management. Issues can also be
updated in other knowledge areas. For example, issues can be documented for require-
ments, procurement, staffing, and other areas, but stakeholders must be informed about
these issues and engaged in the process of addressing them.
Table 13-4 provides a sample issue log that Debra could use to help document and
manage issues on her project. The issue log includes columns for the issue number, the
issue description, the impact of the issue on the project, the date the issue was reported,
who reported the issue, the person assigned to resolve the issue, the priority of the issue
(high, medium, or low), the due date for reporting back on the issue, the status of the
issue, and comments related to the issue. Some project management software includes the
ability to track issues, or a simple spreadsheet can be used. Many project managers sort
issues by priority and focus on resolving the high-priority issues first.
Project Stakeholder Management
549
Measure of
Success
Priority
Expectations
Guidelines
Scope
1
The scope statement
clearly defines mandatory
requirements and optional
requirements.
Focus on meeting mandatory
requirements before consider-
ing optional ones. In this case,
following corporate IT stan-
dards is optional.
Time
1
There is little give in the
project completion date.
The schedule is very
realistic.
The project sponsor must be
alerted if any issues might
affect meeting schedule goals.
Cost
3
This project is crucial to
the organization. If you can
clearly justify the need for
more funds, they can be
made available.
There are strict rules for proj-
ect expenditures and escala-
tion procedures. Cost is very
important, but it takes a back
seat to meeting schedule and
then scope goals.
Technology/
standards
2
There are several potential
solutions available, but
only one that meets all
of the sponsor's technical
requirements, especially for
accounting.
While corporate IT standards
are important, an exception
makes sense in this case.
Table 13-3  Expectations management matrix
Issue #
Description
Impact
Date
Reported
Reported
by
Assigned
to
Priority
(H/M/L)
Due
Date
Status
Comments
1
Need
requirements
categorized
as manda-
tory and
optional
Cannot
do much
without it
Feb. 4
Ryan
Stephen
H
Feb. 8
Closed
Require-
ments clearly
labeled
2
Need shorter
list of poten-
tial suppliers
-no more
than 10
Will delay
evaluation
without it
Feb. 6
Debra
Ryan
H
Feb. 12
Open
Almost fin-
ished; needed
requirements
categorized
first
Etc.
Table 13-4  Sample issue log
Chapter 13
550
Other outputs of managing stakeholder engagement include change requests and
updates to the project management plan and other project documents. For example, after
Stephen clarified which requirements were mandatory for the project management sys-
tem needed to upgrade the oil refineries, it would probably affect which suppliers would
meet the criteria for potential selection. If the project included visiting potential suppliers,
the schedule and cost might be affected depending on the location of the top suppliers.
In addition, Debra might be able to use these mandatory requirements to argue for using
nonstandard technology when talking to Chien. Debra would still need to address this
issue carefully with him, and she could benefit from using some of the ideas described in
the following Best Practice feature.
monitoring Stakeholder Engagement
You cannot control stakeholders, but you can monitor their level of engagement. Engage-
ment involves a dialogue in which people seek understanding and solutions to issues of
mutual concern. Many teachers are familiar with various techniques for engaging students.
B e s t P r a c t i c e
Project managers are often faced with challenges, especially in managing stakeholders.
Sometimes they simply cannot meet requests from important stakeholders. Suggestions
for handling these situations include the following:

Be clear from the start. Project managers should emphasize the importance of
their projects to the entire organization. For example, in the chapter's open-
ing case, the company had to upgrade several oil refineries to stay in business.
IT standards are important, but when a powerful new VP is hired and wants
software with specific requirements to get an important job done, you have to
consider all options.

Explain the consequences. Project managers have to be able to explain the
consequences of various decisions. Senior managers may not like a decision,
but if you present the logic behind it, they are more open to accepting it.

Have a contingency plan. There are many forms of contingency plans. If a
project manager cannot reason with an important stakeholder, a more senior
person might be asked to help, for example. In extreme cases, project manag-
ers might even move on to other jobs if they feel their work is not appreciated.

Avoid surprises. It is much better to be honest about project challenges so
that actions can be taken. One of the worst situations project managers face is
telling sponsors something cannot be done after assuring them that it could.

Take a stand. Project managers do make a difference in leading their projects,
and part of the job is acknowledging the need for a change in course. "If you
don't step it up and say, 'We cannot get this done and this is the way it is,' then
what are you there for? . . . If a sponsor wants a good, seasoned project man-
ager, that's what you must do."6
Project Stakeholder Management
551
It is important to set the proper tone at the start of a class or a project. For example, if a
teacher does nothing but lecture on the first day of class or criticizes the first student who
offers a comment, students will quickly decide that their best strategy is to keep quiet and
maybe not even attend class. On the other hand, if the teacher uses a lot of activities to
get all students to speak or use technology to participate, students will expect to be active
participants in future classes.
Just like teachers, project managers need to set the stage for engaging project stake-
holders early in the project. For example, key stakeholders should be invited to actively
participate in a kick-off meeting rather than merely attend it. The project manager should
emphasize that a dialogue is expected at the meeting, using whatever means of commu-
nication the stakeholders prefer. It is also helpful for the project manager to meet with
important stakeholders before the kick-off meeting.
The project schedule should include activities and deliverables related to stakeholder
engagement. Surveys, reviews, demonstrations, sign-offs, and other items require stake-
holder engagement.
On some IT projects, important stakeholders are invited to be members of the
project teams. For example, when Northwest Airlines (now Delta) was developing
M e d i a S n a p s h o t
Many students today like to interact via text messages. Parents and teachers have
adopted this means of communication as well, especially with young people. Ellen
DeGeneres, a popular comedian with her own television show, likes to poke fun at
text messages in a segment based on amusing errors caused by cell phone auto-correct
features. For example, a father had the following text exchange with his daughter:
New Messages
Message
Edit
Send
"Your mom and I are going to divorce next month."
"What??? Why??? Call me please!"
"I wrote Disney and this phone changed it.
We are going to Disney."
Message
(continued)
Chapter 13
552
In addition to watching out for auto-correct errors when messaging, users must also be
careful who they reply to and what they say in reply. The following example comes from
an actual college student who forgot about an exam. The professor called the student's
cell phone shortly after the exam started. Her policy was to assign a grade of zero if
students did not show up without a valid excuse. The student did not answer the phone
call, but he sent the following texts:
The professor was surprised when the student walked into her classroom a few
seconds later. Apparently he was down the hall working on a campus computer. Even
though he lied twice (about being in class and about taking someone to the hospital), the
professor let him take the exam and tried not to give him a hard time about his lies. The
student was on time for future exams.
New Messages
Message
Edit
Send
Message
Professor: "Where are you?"
Student: "In class. Who is this?"
Student: "Who is this?"
Professor: "Did you drop MIS101? Professor Smith"
Professor: "You are missing exam 1 right now."
Student: "Okay. Is it possible to do it during your oﬃce hours?"
Professor: "No. Now."
Student: "No. I had to give my sister's ﬁancé a ride to the veteran's
hospital because he doesn't have a car and my sister was at work."
a new reservation system called ResNet, it interviewed reservation agents for posi-
tions as programmers on the project team. Northwest made sure that user needs
were understood by having them actually develop the system's user interface. See
the Companion website for detailed information about how the ResNet team engaged
with users.
Project Stakeholder Management
553
Using Software To Assist In Project Stakeholder
Management
As in the other knowledge areas, software can also assist in project stakeholder manage-
ment. Productivity software like word processors, spreadsheets, and presentation software
can aid in creating various documents related to stakeholder management. Communica-
tions software like e-mail, blogs, websites, texts, and tweets can aid in stakeholder com-
munications. Collaboration tools like Google docs, wikis, and virtual meeting software can
also promote stakeholder engagement in projects.
A very popular software category today-social media-can also help engage stake-
holders. For example, many professionals use LinkedIn to connect with other profession-
als. Several project management groups are on LinkedIn and other sites where people can
share ideas about various topics. In fact, searching LinkedIn groups for the term project
management in February 2018 yielded almost 6,000 results, including the following:

Project Manager Community: This group claims to be the "best group for
project management" with over 424,000 members. This community was cre-
ated by ProjectManager.com.

PMI Project, Program and Portfolio Management: With over 247,000 mem-
bers, this official PMI group claims to be #1 for career advancement.

PMO-Project Management Office: This virtual community has over 134,000
members around the globe.
Although many organizations do not promote the use of Facebook at work, several
project management software tools include functionality like Facebook's to encourage
relationship building on projects. For example, some tools allow people to give each other
"high fives" for a job well done. Many include photos of project team members and other
stakeholders. Users can also have conversation threads within the tools. In fact, several
books and articles are available about using social media to help manage projects.
Elizabeth Harrin, Director of The Otobos Group in London, is the author of Social
Media for Project Managers. In the book, Harrin describes the pros and cons of several
social media tools, including blogs, collaboration tools, instant messaging, microblogs like
Twitter and Facebook, podcasts, RSS, social networks, vodcasts (video podcasts), webinars,
A d v i c e f o r Y o u n g P r o f e s s i o n a l s
If you do not yet have an account on LinkedIn, set one up. If you already have one,
search for groups that may be of interest and join them. Ask to connect with people you
admire. Most LinkedIn users are happy to connect with others.
Also, if you know of ways that social media can assist your project team to improve
stakeholder engagement, discuss it with your team. Be sure to research various options
before making any recommendations. Also consider setting up online and physical "meet
ups" to promote stakeholder engagement.
Chapter 13
554
and wikis. In the foreword of the book, Len O'Neal, Online Content and Strategy Manager
for PMI, stated: "Making social media work on your projects can be a project in itself. . . .
Individual, team, organizational, and cultural biases and influences can play a significant
part in how far you explore the road to project-based social media efforts and how success-
ful you are."7 Harrin provides advice for when to use social media and when not to use it.
As the saying goes, "A fool with a tool is still just a fool." It is crucial that project man-
agers and their teams focus on monitoring stakeholder engagement to meet their needs
and expectations, not to show off the latest technology. A lot of stakeholder engagement
requires old-fashioned techniques like talking to someone!
Considerations For Agile/Adaptive Environments
The PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition provides the following information for project stake-
holder management:
Projects experiencing a high degree of change require active engagement and participa-
tion with project stakeholders. To facilitate timely, productive discussion and decision
making, adaptive teams engage with stakeholders directly rather than going through
layers of management. Often the client, user, and developer exchange information in
a dynamic co-creative process that leads to more stakeholder involvement and higher
satisfaction. Regular interactions with the stakeholder community throughout the
G l o b a l I s s u e s
Not all software implementations go well, and managing stakeholders is a major chal-
lenge. The U.K. government scrapped its £11.4 billion national healthcare IT initiative in
September 2011 after it failed to deliver the promised benefits. Unfortunately, this proj-
ect was just one in a series of high-profile failures in the United Kingdom.
In response, the government decided to send its project managers back to school!
The government partnered with the University of Oxford and the Deloitte consulting
firm to establish the Major Projects Leadership Academy in Oxford, England. Currently,
300 people are categorized as major project leaders in the British government. The goal
of the new academy is to reduce the overreliance on expensive external consultants and
build expertise within the civil service. In the future, "no one will be able to lead a major
government project without completing the Academy."8 Project leaders working on the
2012 Olympics and the High Speed Two railway system were the first to benefit from the
new program.
The academy enrolls over 100 major project leaders each year. Has it made a dif-
ference? According to Paul Chapman, EngD, the head of the academy, it certainly has.
"Three years ago, about one-third of the government's major projects were delivered on
time and to budget . . . now this is nearly two-thirds."9 You can find more details on the
Major Projects Leadership Academy website.
Project Stakeholder Management
555
project mitigate risk, build trust, and support adjustments earlier in the project cycle,
thus reducing costs and increasing the likelihood of success for the project.
In order to accelerate the sharing of information within and across the organization,
agile methods promote aggressive transparency. The intent of inviting any stakehold-
ers to project meetings and reviews or posting project artifacts in public spaces is to
surface as quickly as possible any misalignment, dependency, or other issues related
to the changing project.10
As discussed throughout this text, it is important to understand and involve key stake-
holders on all projects. The nature of agile/adaptive projects, however, does often require
more stakeholder involvement and faster decision making. Product owners create the
backlog for each iteration, thereby ensuring that their priorities are clear.
Posting project artifacts in a public space can be done on agile and non-agile projects,
based on the sensitivity of the information and type of project. For example, some large
construction projects include webcams so viewers can see physical progress at any time.
Also recall that many organizations view agile as a mindset, focusing on driving business
value to customers. No matter what product life cycle is used, projects should focus on
providing value.
The processes involved in project stakeholder management, as well as the other
knowledge areas, follow a clear, logical sequence. However, this may be the most difficult
area to master for many project managers. As you learned in this and previous chapters,
understanding a wide variety of people and getting them to work together to meet project
goals is not an easy undertaking.
C a s e W r a p - U p
Debra let Chien cool down a while before entering his office again. She realized that she
needed his signature on an important document.
"Are you going to yell at me again?" she asked.
Chien smiled and apologized for being so upset earlier. He was very happy with
Debra's performance and knew that she was an asset to the company. He explained how
hard it was for him to try to develop and enforce IT standards, especially when a new VP
like Stephen comes in and gets what he wants so easily.
Debra explained that the software solution she recommended was the only one
that would integrate well with the various accounting systems at refineries in other
countries. She described some of the technical details she learned after meeting with
the Director of Accounting, and Stephen knew it was essential to keep track of costs
well on such a huge project. Chien agreed that upgrading the oil refineries quickly
and cost-effectively was the top priority for the company now. He told Debra that he
trusted her objective analysis in making the best recommendation. He also told her
that it took a lot of guts to go against him and Ryan, but he knew now that it was best
for the company as a whole.
Chapter 13
556
Chapter Summary
Managing stakeholders is the tenth knowledge area in the PMBOK Guide - Sixth Edition.
Project stakeholder management includes identifying stakeholders, planning stakeholder
engagement, managing stakeholder engagement, and monitoring stakeholder engagement.
You cannot perform the other stakeholder management processes until you first identify
project stakeholders. Stakeholders can be internal or external to the organization, and they might
support or oppose your project. The main output of this process is a stakeholder register.
A stakeholder analysis is a key technique used in planning stakeholder engagement. Some
information, such as how to manage relationships with stakeholders, might be sensitive, so it
must be handled carefully. A stakeholder management plan describes stakeholder engagement
levels, interrelationships, communication requirements, management strategies, and a process
for updating the plan.
When managing stakeholder engagement, project managers and their teams must under-
stand various expectations of stakeholders and use their communications and interpersonal
skills. It is important to encourage engagement early in a project and have deliverables that
require engagement. An important output of this process is updating the issue log-a document
used to help track and resolve issues on projects.
It is important to monitor stakeholder engagement by having an open dialogue and tracking
deliverables related to engagement.
Several types of software can assist in project stakeholder management. In addition to
technologies mentioned in other chapters to improve communications and collaboration, social
media can also help in developing relationships with stakeholders. Some project management
software applications include features inspired by social media, such as giving "high fives" and
posting comment threads.
Be sure to consider how project integration management can differ in agile/adaptive
environments.
Discussion Questions
1. Why do you think PMI created a separate knowledge area for stakeholder management?
2. What are some ways to identify project stakeholders? Which stakeholders do you think are
often not identified when they should be?
3. What are some ways to manage a stakeholder relationship closely? Give examples of how you
might manage relationships differently based on the unique personalities of different people.
4. Discuss ways that you have seen people manage stakeholder engagement in your class-
room or work environments. Which approaches seem to work the best?
5. Describe the type of information that is documented in an issue log. How can you avoid
spending too much time documenting and tracking issues?
6. How can software assist in project stakeholder management? Do you think social media
tools are more likely to help or hinder projects?
Project Stakeholder Management
557
Quick Quiz
1. Which knowledge area was first introduced in the PMBOK Guide in 2013?
a.
Project engagement management
b.
Project consulting management
c.
Project stakeholder engagement
d.
Project stakeholder management
2. Suppliers and concerned citizens are examples of which type of stakeholders?
a.
Internal
b.
External
c.
Supportive
d.
Unsupportive
3. What type of information about stakeholders is not included in a stakeholder register?
a.
Identification
b.
Classification
c.
Assessment
d.
Engagement level
4. What type of grid can categorize stakeholders based on their level of authority and
concern?
a.
A power/interest grid
b.
An authority/concern grid
c.
An authority/interest grid
d.
A resistance/support grid
5. One of your project stakeholders has a high amount of authority and a high amount of inter-
est. How should you manage that relationship?
a.
Keep informed
b.
Keep satisfied
c.
Manage closely
d.
Monitor
6. Which type of matrix can help clarify which knowledge areas are most important to stake-
holders on a project?
a.
A knowledge area matrix
b.
A prioritization matrix
c.
An expectations management matrix
d.
A stakeholder management matrix
Chapter 13
558
7. What tool can you use to document, monitor, and track items that need resolution on a
project?
a.
An issue log
b.
A risk register
c.
An issue register
d.
A resolution log
8. When should you start controlling stakeholder engagement on a project?
a.
In the early phases
b.
In the middle phases
c.
In the latter phases
d.
None of the above; you cannot control stakeholder engagement
9. Which of the following statements is false about software that can assist in project stake-
holder management?
a.
Social media tools can assist in stakeholder management.
b.
Some project management software includes features like giving "high fives."
c.
Texting is an example of a microblog that can keep stakeholders informed about project
work.
d.
A vodcast is a video podcast that can inform and engage stakeholders.
10. After a series of large project disasters, what country is requiring people to complete a new
academic program in project management before leading a large government project?
a.
Australia
b.
The United Kingdom
c.
India
d.
Japan
Quick Quiz Answers
1. d; 2. b; 3. d; 4. a; 5. c; 6. c; 7. a; 8. a; 9. c; 10. b
Exercises
1. Review the chapter's opening case and some of the sample documents related to it. How do
you think Debra handled the various stakeholders? Offer at least two suggestions for what
she might have done to avoid being yelled at by a senior manager. Summarize your answers
in a short memo to Debra.
2. Search the Internet for articles related to dealing with project sponsors. Summarize two
good articles in a memo that you could send to a new project manager, offering advice on
how to effectively engage sponsors.
Project Stakeholder Management
559
3. Interview someone who worked on an information technology project that involved several
difficult stakeholders. Ask what they did that worked well and what did not work well. Sum-
marize the interview results in a thank-you e-mail to the person you interviewed, highlighting
important lessons you learned from them.
4. Review the information for using a power/interest grid. Find at least two articles that
describe this grid or a similar one to help categorize stakeholders and how to manage
them. Summarize your results in a memo to a new project manager who is interested in
this tool.
5. Go to www.linkedin.com. If you do not have an account, set one up. Search for groups
related to project management and topics related to stakeholder management. Join at least
two groups and read some of the discussion topics. Post one good question to each of the
groups and wait at least two days for responses. Summarize what you learned and post the
summary on both sites.
6. Search for articles related to the importance of keeping certain stakeholder information con-
fidential. What types of information should be confidential? Describe two examples of actual
problems that occurred when confidential information was leaked. Summarize your findings
in a short paper or presentation.
Running Case
Recall that the following people are involved in the Global Treps Project:

You, the project manager

Dr. K., the project sponsor

Bobby, team member/technical specialist

Alfreda, Kim, and Ashok, team members organizing events in other countries

Suppliers for the domain name and site hosting, the donation acceptance feature of the
website, and the video creation for the website (including Angela, the contact person at
the video supplier)

Instructors at each site helping to organize the events (including Dr. B. in Ethiopia)
1. Prepare a stakeholder register using the preceding information. Make up other information
as needed.
2. Create a stakeholder management strategy for the project, focusing on members who are
not on the project team, such as Angela and Dr. B. Make up names and personalities for the
other two instructor contacts in India and Vietnam. Be creative in developing potential man-
agement strategies.
3. Prepare an issue log for the project. Include issues discussed in prior chapters, such as
Ashok breaking his wrist, Bobby's desire to use kanban boards, and Alfreda's difficulties
communicating with Dr. B. Make up three additional potential issues.
Chapter 13
560
Key Terms
expectations management matrix
issue log
power/interest grid
stakeholder analysis
stakeholder register
Endnotes

1 Peter Fretty, "Most Valuable Players," PM Network (May 2012).

2 Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge
(PMBOK Guide) - Sixth Edition (2017), p. 505.

3 Peter Gilliland, "List of Project Stakeholders," www.projectstakeholder.com (accessed
May 1, 2012).

4 Denene Brox, "Say No," PM Network (May 2012), pp. 46-49.

5 Kathy Schwalbe, An Introduction to Project Management, Fourth Edition (2012).

6 Denene Brox, op. cit., pp. 46-49.

7 Elizabeth Harrin, Social Media for Project Managers, Project Management Institute (2010).

8 University of Oxford, "Oxford Teams Up with Cabinet Office to Teach Leadership," PM Net-
work (February 7, 2012).

9 Steve Hendershot, "Facing Up to Government IT Project Failures," PM Network (May 2015),
www.pmi.org/Learning/PM-Network/2015/facing-government-it-project-failures.aspx.

10 Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowl-
edge (PMBOK Guide) - Sixth Edition (2017), p. 506.
Glossary
5 whys  A technique in which you repeatedly
ask the question "Why?" to help peel away the
layers of symptoms that can lead to the root
cause of a problem
acceptance decisions  Decisions that determine
if the products or services produced as part of
the project will be accepted or rejected
activity  An element of work normally found on
the WBS that has an expected duration, cost,
and resource requirements; also called a task
activity attributes  Information about each
activity, such as predecessors, successors,
logical relationships, leads and lags, resource
requirements, constraints, imposed dates, and
assumptions related to the activity
activity list  A tabulation of activities to be
included on a project schedule
activity-on-arrow (AOA)  A network
diagramming technique in which activities
are represented by arrows and connected at
points called nodes to illustrate the sequence
of activities; also called arrow diagramming
method (ADM)
actual cost (AC)  The total of direct and
indirect costs incurred in accomplishing work
on an activity during a given period
agile  Quick and coordinated in movement;
a method based on iterative and incremental
development, in which requirements and solu-
tions evolve through collaboration
agile methods  An approach to managing proj-
ects that includes a workflow comprised of
short iterations and incremental delivery of
software
analogous estimates  A cost-estimating
technique that uses the actual cost of a previous
similar project as the basis for estimating the
cost of the current project; also called top-down
estimates
analogy approach  Creating a WBS by using a
similar project's WBS as a starting point
appraisal cost  The cost of evaluating processes
and their outputs to ensure that a project is
error-free or within an acceptable error range
arrow diagramming method (ADM)  A network
diagramming technique in which activities
are represented by arrows and connected at
points called nodes to illustrate the sequence of
activities; also called activity-on-arrow (AOA)
artifact  A useful object created by people
backward pass  A project network diagramming
technique that determines the late start and late
finish dates for each activity
balanced scorecard  A strategic planning and
management system that helps organizations
align business activities to strategy, improve
communications, and monitor performance
against strategic goals
baseline  The approved project management
plan plus approved changes
baseline dates  The planned schedule dates for
activities in a Tracking Gantt chart
benchmarking  Generating ideas by comparing
specific project practices or product
characteristics to those of other projects or
products inside or outside the performing
organization
best practice  An optimal way recognized by
industry to achieve a stated goal or objective
bid  A document prepared by sellers to provide
pricing for standard items that the buyer has
clearly defined; also called a tender or quote
(short for quotation)
blogs  Journals on the web that allow users to
write entries, create links, and upload pictures,
while readers can post comments to journal
entries
bottom-up approach  Creating a WBS by having
team members identify as many specific tasks
related to the project as possible and then
grouping them into higher- level categories
bottom-up estimates  A cost-estimating
­technique based on estimating individual
work items and summing them to get a project
total
brainstorming  A technique by which a group
attempts to generate ideas or find a solution for
a specific problem by amassing ideas spontane-
ously and without judgment
budget at completion (BAC)  The original total
budget for a project
budgetary estimate  A cost estimate used to
allocate money into an organization's budget
Glossary
G.2
buffer  Additional time to complete a task; a
buffer is added to an estimate to account for
various factors
burndown chart  A chart that shows the
cumulative work remaining in a sprint on a
day-by-day basis
burst  A single node followed by two or more
activities on a network diagram
Capability Maturity Model Integration
(CMMI)  A process improvement approach that
provides organizations with the essential ele-
ments of effective processes
capitalization rate  The rate used in discounting
future cash flow; also called the discount rate or
opportunity cost of capital
cash flow  Benefits minus costs or income
minus expenses
cash flow analysis  A method for determining
the estimated annual costs and benefits for a
project
cause-and-effect diagram  A diagram that traces
complaints about quality problems back to the
responsible production operations to help find
the root cause; also known as a fishbone dia-
gram or Ishikawa diagram
champion  A senior manager who acts as a key
proponent for a project
change control board (CCB)  A formal group
of people responsible for approving or rejecting
changes on a project
change control system  A formal, documented
process that describes when and how official
project documents may be changed
charismatic  A leadership style in which people
inspire others based on their enthusiasm and
confidence
checksheet  A technique used to collect and
analyze data; sometimes called a tally sheet or
checklist
closing processes Formalizing acceptance
of the project or project phase and ending it
efficiently
coercive power  Using punishment, threats, or
other negative approaches to get people to do
things they do not want to do
collaborating mode  A conflict-handling mode
in which decision makers incorporate different
viewpoints and insights to develop consensus
and commitment
communications management plan  A docu-
ment that guides project communications
compromise mode  Using a give-and-take
approach to resolve conflicts; bargaining and
searching for solutions that bring some degree
of satisfaction to all the parties in a dispute
configuration management  A process that
ensures that the descriptions of a project's
­products are correct and complete
conformance  Delivering products that meet
requirements and fitness for use
conformance to requirements  Project
processes and products that meet written
specifications
confrontation mode  Facing a conflict directly
using a problem-solving approach that
allows affected parties to work through their
disagreements
constructive change orders  Oral or written acts
or omissions by someone with actual or appar-
ent authority that can be construed to have the
same effect as a written change order
contingency allowances  Provisions held by the
project sponsor or organization to reduce the
risk of cost or schedule overruns to an accept-
able level; also called contingency reserves
contingency plans  Predefined actions that the
project team will take if an identified risk event
occurs
contingency reserves  Dollar amounts included
in a cost estimate to allow for future situations
that may be partially planned for (sometimes
called known unknowns) and that are included
in the project cost baseline
contract  A mutually binding agreement that
obligates the seller to provide specified products
or services and obligates the buyer to pay for
them
control chart  A graphic display of data that
illustrates the results of a process over time
cost baseline  A time-phased budget that proj-
ect managers use to measure and monitor cost
performance
cost of capital  The return available by investing
capital elsewhere
cost of nonconformance  Taking responsibility
for failures or not meeting quality expectations
cost of quality  The cost of conformance plus
the cost of nonconformance
Glossary
G.3
cost performance index (CPI)  The ratio of
earned value to actual cost; can be used to
estimate the projected cost to complete the
project
cost plus award fee (CPAF) contract
A contract in which the buyer pays the supplier
for allowable costs (as defined in the contract)
plus an award fee based on the satisfaction of
subjective performance criteria
cost plus fixed fee (CPFF) contract
A contract in which the buyer pays the
supplier for allowable costs (as defined in
the contract) plus a fixed fee payment that is
usually based on a percentage of estimated
costs
cost plus incentive fee (CPIF) contract  A
contract in which the buyer pays the supplier
for allowable costs (as defined in the contract)
along with a predetermined fee and an incentive
bonus
cost plus percentage of costs (CPPC) contract
A contract in which the buyer pays the supplier
for allowable costs (as defined in the contract)
along with a predetermined percentage based
on total costs
cost variance (CV)  The earned value minus the
actual cost
cost-reimbursable contracts  Contracts that
involve payment to the supplier for direct and
indirect actual costs
crashing  A technique for making cost and
schedule trade-offs to obtain the greatest
amount of schedule compression for the least
incremental cost
critical chain scheduling  A method of schedul-
ing that takes limited resources into account
when creating a project schedule and includes
buffers to protect the project completion date
critical path method (CPM) or critical path
analysis  A project network diagramming
technique used to predict total project duration
daily Scrum  A short meeting in which the team
shares progress and challenges
decision tree  A diagramming analysis tech-
nique used to help select the best course of
action when future outcomes are uncertain
decomposition  Subdividing project deliverables
into smaller pieces
defect  Any instance in which the product or
service fails to meet customer requirements
definitive estimate  A cost estimate that pro-
vides an accurate estimate of project costs
deliverable  A product or service, such as a
technical report, a training session, a piece
of hardware, or a segment of software code,
produced or provided as part of a project
Delphi technique  An approach used to derive
a consensus among a panel of experts to make
predictions about future developments
dependency  The sequencing of project
activities or tasks; also called a relationship
deputy project managers  People who fill in for
project managers in their absence and assist
them as needed
design of experiments  A quality technique that
helps identify which variables have the most
influence on the overall outcome of a process
DevOps  A culture of collaboration between
software development and operations teams to
build, test, and release reliable software more
quickly
direct costs  Costs that can be directly related to
creating the products and services of the project
directives  New requirements imposed by
management, government, or some external
influence
discount factor  A multiplier for each year
based on the discount rate and year
discount rate  The rate used in discounting
future cash flow; also called the capitalization
rate or opportunity cost of capital
discretionary dependencies  The sequencing of
project activities or tasks defined by the project
team and used with care because they may
limit later scheduling options
DMAIC (Define, Measure, Analyze, Improve,
Control) A systematic closed-loop process for
continued improvement that is scientific and
fact based
dummy activities  Activities with no duration and
no resources used to show a logical relationship
between two activities in the arrow diagramming
method of project network diagrams
duration  The actual amount of time worked on
an activity plus elapsed time
early finish date  The earliest possible time an
activity can finish based on the project network
logic
Glossary
G.4
early start date  The earliest possible time an
activity can start based on the project network
logic
earned value (EV)  An estimate of the value of
the physical work actually completed
earned value management (EVM)  A project
performance measurement technique that
­integrates scope, time, and cost data
effort  The number of workdays or work hours
required to complete a task
emotional intelligence Knowing and managing
one's own emotions and understanding the
emotions of others for improved performance
empathic listening  Listening with the intent to
understand
enterprise project management software
Software that integrates information from
multiple projects to show the status of active,
approved, and future projects across an entire
organization; also called portfolio project
management software
estimate at completion (EAC)  An estimate of
what it will cost to complete the project based
on performance to date
ethics  A set of principles that guides decision
making based on personal values of what is
­considered right and wrong
executing processes Coordinating people and
other resources to carry out the project plans
and create the products, services, or results of
the project or project phase
executive steering committee  A group of senior
executives from various parts of the organiza-
tion who regularly review important corporate
projects and issues
expectations management matrix  A tool that
helps clarify expectations and lists project mea-
sures of success as well as priorities, expectations,
and guidelines related to each measure
expected monetary value (EMV)  The product
of a risk event probability and the risk event's
monetary value
expert power  Using one's personal knowledge
and expertise to get people to change their
behavior
explicit knowledge  Knowledge that can
be easily explained using words, pictures,
or numbers and is easy to communicate,
store, and distribute, such as information in
textbooks, project documents, and plans
external dependencies  The sequencing of
project activities or tasks that involve rela-
tionships between project and non-project
activities
external failure cost  A cost related to all errors
that are not detected and corrected before
delivery to the customer
extrinsic motivation  An approach that causes
people to do something for a reward or to avoid
a penalty
fallback plans  Plans developed for risks
that have a high impact on meeting project
objectives and implemented if attempts to
reduce the risk are not effective
fast tracking  A schedule compression ­technique
in which you do activities in parallel that you
would normally do in sequence
features  The special characteristics that appeal
to users
feeding buffers  Time added before tasks on
the critical chain if they are preceded by other
tasks that are not on the critical path
finish-to-finish dependency  A relationship on
a project network diagram in which the "from"
activity must be finished before the "to" activity
can be finished
finish-to-start dependency  A relationship on a
project network diagram in which the "from"
activity must be finished before the "to" activity
can be started
fishbone diagram  A diagram that traces com-
plaints about quality problems back to the
responsible production operations to help find
the root cause; also known as a cause-and-effect
diagram or Ishikawa diagram
fitness for use  A product that can be used as it
was intended
fixed-price contract  A contract with a fixed
total price for a well-defined product or service;
also called a lump-sum contract
float  The amount of time a project activity
may be delayed without delaying a succeeding
activity or the project finish date; also called
slack
flowchart  A graphic display of the logic and
flow of processes that helps you analyze how
problems occur and how processes can be
improved
forcing mode  Using a win/lose approach to
conflict resolution to get one's way
Glossary
G.5
forecasts  Predictions of future project status
and progress based on past information and
trends
forward pass  A network diagramming
technique that determines the early start and
early finish dates for each activity
free slack (free float)  The amount of time
an activity can be delayed without delaying
the early start of any immediately following
activities
function points  A means of measuring software
size in terms that are meaningful to end users
functional organizational structure  An
organizational structure that groups people by
functional areas such as IT, manufacturing,
engineering, and human resources
functionality  The degree to which a system
performs its intended function
Gantt chart  A standard format for displaying
project schedule information by listing project
activities and their corresponding start and
finish dates in a calendar format; sometimes
referred to as bar charts
Google Docs  Online applications offered
by Google that allow users to create, share,
and edit documents, spreadsheets, and
presentations online
groupthink  Conformance to the values or
ethical standards of a group
hierarchy of needs  A pyramid structure illus-
trating Maslow's theory that people's behaviors
are guided or motivated by a sequence of needs
histogram  A bar graph of a distribution of
variables
human resources (HR) frame  A frame that
focuses on producing harmony between the
needs of the organization and the needs of
people
indirect costs  Costs that are not directly
related to the products or services of the
project, but are indirectly related to performing
the project
influence diagram  A diagram that represents
decision problems by displaying essential ele-
ments, including decisions, uncertainties, and
objectives, and how they influence each other
initiating processes  Defining and authorizing a
project or project phase
intangible costs or benefits  Costs or benefits
that are difficult to measure in monetary terms
integrated change control  Identifying,
evaluating, and managing changes throughout
the project life cycle
integration testing  Testing that occurs between
unit and system testing to test functionally
grouped components and ensure that a subset
or subsets of the entire system work together
interactional  A leadership style in which people
use a combination of transactional, transforma-
tional, and charismatic approaches
interface management  Identifying and
managing the points of interaction between
various elements of a project
internal dependencies  Relationships between
project activities that are generally inside the
project team's control
internal failure cost  A cost incurred to correct
an identified defect before the customer
receives the product
internal rate of return (IRR)  The discount rate
that results in an NPV of zero for a project
interviewing  A fact-finding technique that
is normally done face to face, but can also
occur through phone calls, e-mail, or instant
messaging
intrinsic motivation  An approach that causes
people to participate in an activity for their own
enjoyment
Ishikawa diagram  A diagram that traces com-
plaints about quality problems back to the
responsible production operations to help find
the root cause; also known as a ­cause-and-effect
diagram or fishbone diagram
ISO 9000  A quality system standard
developed by the International Organization
for Standardization (ISO) that includes a three-
part, continuous cycle of planning, controlling,
and documenting quality in an organization
issue log  A tool used to document, monitor,
and track issues that need resolution
IT governance  The authority and control for
key IT activities in organizations, including IT
infrastructure, IT use, and project management
Joint Application Design (JAD)  Using highly
organized and intensive workshops to bring
together project stakeholders-the sponsor,
Glossary
G.6
users, business analysts, programmers, and so
on-to jointly define and design information
systems
kaizen  The Japanese word for improvement
or change for the better; an approach used for
continuously improving quality in organizations
kanban  A just-in-time method of inventory
control that can be used in conjunction with
Scrum
kick-off meeting  A meeting held at the
beginning of a project so that stakeholders can
meet each other, review the goals of the project,
and discuss future plans
kill point  A management review that should
occur after each project phase to determine if
projects should be continued, redirected, or
terminated; also called a phase exit
known risks  Risks that the project team
has identified and analyzed and that can be
managed proactively
known unknowns  Dollar amounts included in a
cost estimate to allow for future situations that
may be partially planned for (sometimes called
contingency reserves) and that are included in
the project cost baseline
laissez-faire  A leadership style meaning
"let go," this hands-off approach lets teams
determine their own goals and how to achieve
them
late finish date  The latest possible time an
activity can be completed without delaying the
project finish date
late start date  The latest possible time an
activity may begin without delaying the project
finish date
leader  A person who focuses on long-term
goals and big-picture objectives while inspiring
people to reach those goals
lean  An approach for improving quality that
involves evaluating processes to maximize
customer value while minimizing waste
learning curve theory  A theory that when
many items are produced repetitively, the unit
cost of those items normally decreases in a
regular pattern as more units are produced
legitimate power  Getting people to do things
based on a position of authority
lessons-learned report  Reflective statements
written by project managers and their team
members to document important information
they have learned from working on a project
life cycle costing  The total cost of ownership,
or development plus support costs, for a project
lump-sum contract  A contract with a fixed
total price for a well-defined product or service;
also called a fixed-price contract
maintainability  The ease of performing mainte-
nance on a product
make-or-buy decision  An organization's deci-
sion to make certain products and perform cer-
tain services inside the organization or to buy
them from an outside organization
Malcolm Baldrige National Quality  Award  An
award started in 1987 to recognize companies
that have achieved a level of world-class compe-
tition through quality management
management reserves  Dollar amounts included
in a cost estimate to allow for future situations
that are unpredictable (sometimes called
unknown unknowns)
manager  A person who deals with the
day-to-day details of meeting specific goals
mandatory dependencies  The sequencing of
project activities or tasks that are inherent
in the nature of the work being done on the
project
matrix organizational structure  An orga-
nizational structure in which employees
are assigned both to functional and project
managers
maturity model  A framework for helping orga-
nizations improve their processes and systems
mean  The average value of a population
measurement and test equipment costs  The
capital cost of equipment used to perform
­prevention and appraisal activities
megaproject  A very large project that typically
costs over US$1 billion, affects over one million
people, and lasts several years
merge  Two or more nodes that precede a single
node on a network diagram
methodology  A description of how things
should be done
metric  A standard of measurement
Glossary
G.7
milestone  A significant event that normally has
no duration on a project; serves as a marker to
help in identifying necessary activities, setting
schedule goals, and monitoring progress
mind mapping  A technique that uses branches
radiating from a core idea to structure thoughts
and ideas
mirroring  Matching certain behaviors of
another person
monitoring and controlling processes
Regularly measuring and monitoring progress to
ensure that the project team meets the project
objectives
Monte Carlo analysis  A risk quantification
technique that simulates a model's outcome
many times to provide a statistical distribution
of the calculated results
multitasking  Working on more than one task
at a time
Murphy's Law  The principle that if something
can go wrong, it will
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI)  A popular
tool for determining personality preferences
net present value (NPV) analysis  A method of
calculating the expected net monetary gain or
loss from a project by discounting all expected
future cash inflows and outflows to the present
point in time
network diagram  A schematic display of the
logical relationships or sequencing of project
activities
node  The starting and ending point of an activ-
ity on an activity-on-arrow diagram
normal distribution  A bell-shaped curve that is
symmetrical about the mean of the population
offshoring  Outsourcing from another country
opportunities  Chances to improve an
organization
opportunity cost of capital  The rate used in
discounting future cash flow; also called the
capitalization rate or discount rate
organizational breakdown structure (OBS)  A
specific type of organizational chart that shows
which organizational units are responsible for
particular work items
organizational culture  A set of shared
assumptions, values, and behaviors that
characterize the functioning of an organization
organizational process assets  Formal and
informal plans, policies, procedures, guidelines,
information systems, financial systems,
management systems, lessons learned, and
historical information that can influence a
project's success
organizational project management  A frame-
work in which portfolio, program, and project
management are integrated with organizational
enablers in order to achieve strategic objectives
outsourcing  An organization's acquisition of
goods and services from an outside source
overallocation  A state in which not enough
resources are available to perform the assigned
work during a given time period
overrun  The additional percentage or dollar
amount by which actual costs exceed estimates
parametric estimating  A cost-estimating tech-
nique that uses project characteristics (param-
eters) in a mathematical model to estimate
project costs
Pareto analysis  Identifying the vital few
contributors that account for most quality
problems in a system
Pareto chart  A histogram that helps identify
and prioritize problem areas
Parkinson's Law  The principle that work
expands to fill the time allowed
payback period  The amount of time needed to
recoup the total dollars invested in a project, in
terms of net cash inflows
performance  How well a product or service per-
forms the customer's intended use
PERT weighted average  (Optimistic time 1 4 *
most likely time 1 pessimistic time)/6
phase exit  A management review that should
occur after each project phase to determine if
projects should be continued, redirected, or
terminated; also called a kill point
phase gate review  Management reviews that
keep projects on track and determine if they
should be continued, redirected, or terminated;
also called phase exits or kill points
planned value (PV)  The portion of the
approved total cost estimate planned to be
spent on an activity during a given period
planning processes  Devising and maintaining
a workable scheme to ensure that the project
addresses the organization's needs
Glossary
G.8
Point of Total Assumption (PTA)  The cost at
which the contractor assumes total responsibil-
ity for each additional dollar of contract cost in
a fixed-price incentive fee contract
political frame  A frame that addresses
organizational and personal politics
politics  Competition between groups or
individuals for power and leadership
portfolio  Projects, programs, subsidiary port-
folios, and operations managed as a group to
achieve strategic objectives
power  The ability to influence behavior to get
people to do things they would not otherwise do
power/interest grid  A tool used to group
stakeholders based on their level of authority
(power) and their level of concern (interest) for
project outcomes
precedence diagramming method (PDM)
A network diagramming technique in which
boxes represent activities
predictive life cycle  A software development
approach used when the scope of the project
can be articulated clearly and the schedule and
cost can be predicted accurately
prevention cost  The cost of planning and exe-
cuting a project so that it is error-free or within
an acceptable error range
probabilistic time estimates  Duration estimates
based on using optimistic, most likely, and
pessimistic estimates of activity durations
instead of using one specific or discrete estimate
probability/impact matrix or chart  A matrix
or chart that shows the relative probability of
a risk occurring and the relative impact of the
risk
problems  Undesirable situations that prevent
an organization from achieving its goals
process  A series of actions directed toward a
particular result
process adjustments  Adjustments made to cor-
rect or prevent further quality problems based
on quality control measurements
procurement  Acquiring goods and services
from an outside source
product backlog  A single list of features
prioritized by business value
product life cycle  A process used to define,
create, and deliver products
product owner  The person responsible for the
business value of the project and for deciding
what work to do and in what order when using
a Scrum method
profit margin  The ratio of profits to revenues
profits  Revenues minus expenses
program  A group of related projects,
subprograms, and program activities managed
in a coordinated way to obtain benefits and
control not available from managing them
individually
Program Evaluation and Review Technique
(PERT)  A project network analysis technique
used to estimate project duration when there is
a high degree of uncertainty about the individual
activity duration estimates
program manager  A person who provides
leadership and direction for the project
managers heading the projects within a program
progress reports  Reports that describe what
the project team has accomplished during a
certain period of time
project  A temporary endeavor undertaken to
create a unique product, service, or result
project and portfolio management software
Software that integrates information from
multiple projects to show the status of active,
approved, and future projects across an entire
organization; also called enterprise project
management software
project archives A complete set of organized
project records that provide an accurate history
of the project
project buffer  Time added before the project's
due date
project charter  A document that formally
recognizes the existence of a project and pro-
vides direction on the project's objectives and
management
project cost management  The processes
required to ensure that the project is completed
within the approved budget
project integration management  Processes that
coordinate all project management knowledge
areas throughout a project's life, including
developing the project charter, developing the
preliminary project scope statement, developing
the project management plan, directing and
managing the project, monitoring and controlling
Glossary
G.9
the project, providing integrated change control,
and closing the project
project life cycle  A collection of project phases,
such as concept, development, implementation,
and close-out
project management  The application of knowl-
edge, skills, tools, and techniques to project
activities to meet project requirements
Project Management Institute (PMI)  An
international professional society for project
managers
project management knowledge areas
Project integration management, scope, time,
cost, quality, human resource, communications,
risk, procurement, and stakeholder
management
Project Management Office (PMO)
An organizational group responsible for
coordinating the project management functions
throughout an organization
project management plan  A document used to
coordinate all project planning documents and
guide project execution and control
project management process groups  The
progression of project activities from initiation
to planning, executing, monitoring and
controlling, and closing
Project Management Professional (PMP)
Certification provided by PMI that requires
documenting project experience and
education, agreeing to follow the PMI code of
ethics, and passing a comprehensive exam
project management tools and techniques
Methods available to assist project managers
and their teams; some popular time-
management tools include Gantt charts,
network diagrams, and critical path analysis
project manager  The person responsible for
working with the project sponsor, the project
team, and the other people involved to meet
project goals
project organizational structure  An
organizational structure that groups people
by major projects
project portfolio management or portfolio
management  When organizations group and
manage projects as a portfolio of investments
that contribute to the entire enterprise's
success
project procurement management  The
processes required to acquire goods and
services for a project from outside the
performing organization
project quality management  Ensuring that a
project will satisfy the needs for which it was
undertaken
project scope management  The processes
involved in defining and controlling what work
is or is not included in a project
project scope statement  A document that
includes at least a description of the project,
including its overall objectives and justification,
detailed descriptions of all project deliverables,
and the characteristics and requirements of
products and services produced as part of the
project
project sponsor  The person who provides the
direction and funding for a project
project schedule management  The processes
required to ensure timely completion of a
project
PRojects IN Controlled Environments
(PRINCE2)  A project management methodology
developed in the United Kingdom that defines
45 separate subprocesses and organizes these
into eight process groups
proposal  A document prepared by sellers when
there are different approaches for meeting
buyer needs
prototyping  Developing a working replica of
the system or some aspect of it to help define
user requirements
quality  The totality of characteristics of an
entity that bear on its ability to satisfy stated
or implied needs or the degree to which a set of
inherent characteristics fulfill requirements
quality assurance  Periodic evaluation of overall
project performance to ensure that the project
will satisfy the relevant quality standards
quality audit  A structured review of specific
quality management activities that helps
identify lessons learned and that can improve
performance on current or future projects
quality circles  Groups of nonsupervisors and
work leaders in a single company department
who volunteer to conduct group studies on how
to improve the effectiveness of work in their
department
Glossary
G.10
quality control  Monitoring specific project
results to ensure that they comply with the rel-
evant quality standards and identifying ways to
improve overall quality
RACI charts  Charts that show Responsibility,
Accountability, Consultation, and Informed
roles for project stakeholders
rapport  A relation of harmony, conformity,
accord, or affinity
rate of performance (RP)  The ratio of actual
work completed to the percentage of work
planned to have been completed at any given
time during the life of the project or activity
Rational Unified Process (RUP) framework  An
iterative software development process that
focuses on team productivity and delivers
software best practices to all team members
referent power  Getting others to do things
based on a person's own charisma
relationship  The sequencing of project
activities or tasks; also called a dependency
reliability  The ability of a product or service to
perform as expected under normal conditions
Request for Proposal (RFP)  A document used
to solicit proposals from prospective suppliers
Request for Quote (RFQ)  A document used to
solicit quotes or bids from prospective suppliers
required rate of return  The minimum accept-
able rate of return on an investment
requirement  A condition or capability that
must be met by the project or that must be
present in the product, service, or result to
satisfy an agreement or other formally imposed
specification
requirements management plan  A plan that
describes how project requirements will be
analyzed, documented, and managed
requirements traceability matrix (RTM)  A
table that lists requirements, their various attri-
butes, and the status of the requirements to
ensure that all are addressed
reserves  Dollar amounts included in a cost esti-
mate to mitigate cost risk by allowing for future
situations that are difficult to predict
residual risks  Risks that remain after all of the
response strategies have been implemented
resource breakdown structure  A hierarchical
structure that identifies the project's resources
by category and type
resource histogram  A column chart that shows
the number of resources assigned to a project
over time
resource leveling  A technique for resolving
resource conflicts by delaying tasks
resource loading  The amount of individual
resources an existing schedule requires during
specific time periods
resources  People, equipment, and materials
responsibility assignment matrix (RAM)  A
matrix that maps the work of a project, as
described in the WBS, to the people responsible
for performing the work, as described in the
organizational breakdown structure (OBS)
return on investment (ROI)  A method for
determining the financial value of a project; the
ROI is the result of subtracting the project costs
from the benefits and then dividing by the costs
reward power  Using incentives to induce
people to do things
rework  Action taken to bring rejected items
into compliance with product requirements,
specifications, or other stakeholder
expectations
risk  An uncertainty that can have a negative or
positive effect on meeting project objectives
risk acceptance  Accepting the consequences
if a risk occurs
risk appetite  The degree of uncertainty an
entity is willing to take on in anticipation of a
reward
risk avoidance  Eliminating a specific threat or
risk, usually by eliminating its causes
risk breakdown structure  A hierarchy of
potential risk categories for a project
risk enhancement  Changing the size of an
opportunity by identifying and maximizing key
drivers of the positive risk
risk events  Specific uncertain events that may
occur to the detriment or enhancement of the
project
risk exploitation  Doing whatever you can to
make sure a positive risk happens
risk factors  Numbers that represent the overall
risk of specific events, given their probability of
occurring and the consequence to the project if
they do occur
risk management plan  A plan that documents the
procedures for managing risk throughout a project
Glossary
G.11
risk mitigation  Reducing the impact of a
risk event by reducing the probability of its
occurrence
risk owner  The person who will take
responsibility for a risk and its associated
response strategies and tasks
risk register  A document that contains results
of various risk management processes, often
displayed in a table or spreadsheet format
risk sharing  Allocating ownership of a risk to
another party
risk tolerance  The maximum acceptable
deviation an entity is willing to accept on a
project or business objectives as the potential
impact
risk transference  Shifting the consequence of a
risk and responsibility for its management to a
third party
risk utility  The amount of satisfaction or plea-
sure received from a potential payoff
risk-averse  Having a low tolerance for risk
risk-neutral  A balance between risk and payoff
risk-seeking  Having a high tolerance for risk
Robust Design methods  Methods that focus
on eliminating defects by substituting ­scientific
inquiry for trial-and-error methods
rough order of magnitude (ROM) estimate
A cost estimate prepared very early in the life
of a project to provide a rough idea of what a
project will cost
run chart  A chart that displays the history and
pattern of variation of a process over time
scatter diagram  A diagram that helps to show
if there is a relationship between two variables;
sometimes called XY charts
schedule baseline  The approved planned
schedule for the project
schedule performance index (SPI)  The ratio of
earned value to planned value; can be used to
estimate the projected time to complete a project
schedule variance (SV)  The earned value
minus the planned value
scope  All the work involved in creating the
products of the project and the processes used
to create them
scope baseline  The approved project scope
statement and its associated WBS and WBS
dictionary
scope creep  The tendency for project scope to
keep getting bigger
scope validation  Formal acceptance of the
completed project deliverables
Scrum  The leading agile development
methodology for completing projects with a
complex, innovative scope of work
Scrum team or development team  A cross-
functional team of five to nine people who
organize themselves and the work to produce
the desired results for each sprint
ScrumMaster  A person who ensures that the
team is productive, facilitates the daily Scrum,
enables close cooperation across all roles and
functions, and removes barriers that prevent
the team from being effective
secondary risks  Risks that are a direct result of
implementing a risk response
sellers  Contractors, suppliers, or providers
who provide goods and services to other
organizations
sensitivity analysis  A technique used to show
the effects of changing one or more variables on
an outcome
servant leader  A leadership style in which peo-
ple focus on relationships and community first
and leadership is secondary
seven run rule  If seven data points in a row on
a quality control chart are all below the mean,
above the mean, or increasing or decreasing,
then the process needs to be examined for
nonrandom problems
SharePoint portal  A tool that allows users to
create custom websites to access documents
and applications stored on shared devices
six 9s of quality  A measure of quality control
equal to 1 fault in 1 million opportunities
Six Sigma  A comprehensive and flexible system
for achieving, sustaining, and maximizing
business success that is uniquely driven
by close understanding of customer needs,
disciplined use of facts, data, and statistical
analysis, and diligent attention to managing,
improving, and reinventing business processes
Six Sigma methodologies  Define, Measure,
Analyze, Improve, and Control (DMAIC) is used
to improve an existing business process, and
Define, Measure, Analyze, Design, and Verify
(DMADV) is used to create new product or
process designs
Glossary
G.12
slack  The amount of time a project activity
may be delayed without delaying a succeeding
activity or the project finish date; also called
float
slipped milestone  A milestone activity that is
completed later than planned
SMART criteria  Guidelines to help define mile-
stones that are specific, measurable, assignable,
realistic, and time-framed
smoothing mode  Deemphasizing or avoiding
areas of differences and emphasizing areas of
agreement
software defect  Anything that must be changed
before delivery of the program
Software Quality Function Deployment (SQFD)
model  A maturity model that focuses on defin-
ing user requirements and planning software
projects
sprint  A set period of time, normally two to
four weeks, during which specific work must
be completed and made ready for review when
using Scrum methods
sprint backlog  The highest-priority items from
the product backlog to be completed in a sprint
sprint planning session  A meeting with the
team to select a set of work from the product
backlog to deliver during a sprint
sprint retrospectives  A meeting in which the
team looks for ways to improve the product
and the process based on a review of the
actual performance of the development team
sprint reviews  A meeting in which the team
demonstrates to the product owner what it has
completed during the sprint
staffing management plan  A document that
describes when and how people will be added to
a project team and taken off it
stakeholder analysis  A technique for analyzing
information to determine which stakeholders'
interests to focus on and how to increase
stakeholder support throughout the project
stakeholder register  A document that includes
details about identified project stakeholders
stakeholders  People involved in or affected by
project activities
standard  Best practices for what should be
done
standard deviation  A measure of how much
variation exists in a distribution of data
start-to-finish dependency  A relationship on a
project network diagram in which the "from"
activity cannot start before the "to" activity is
finished
start-to-start dependency  A relationship on a
project network diagram in which the "from"
activity cannot start until the "to" activity starts
statement of work (SOW)  A description of the
work required for procurement
statistical sampling  Choosing part of a population
of interest for inspection
status reports  Reports that describe where a
project stands at a specific point in time
strategic planning  Determining long-term objec-
tives by analyzing the strengths and weaknesses
of an organization, studying opportunities and
threats in the business environment, predicting
future trends, and projecting the need for new
products and services
structural frame  A frame that deals with how
the organization is structured (usually depicted
in an organizational chart) and focuses on
different groups' roles and responsibilities
to meet the goals and policies set by top
management
subproject managers  People responsible for
managing the subprojects of a larger project
sunk cost  Money that has been spent in the
past
SWOT analysis  Analyzing Strengths, Weaknesses,
Opportunities, and Threats; used to aid in
strategic planning
symbolic frame  A frame that focuses on
the symbols, meanings, and culture of an
organization
synergy  An approach in which the whole is
greater than the sum of the parts
system outputs  The screens and reports the
system generates
system testing  Testing the entire system as one
entity to ensure that it is working properly
systems  Sets of interacting components work-
ing within an environment to fulfill some
purpose
systems analysis  A problem-solving approach
that requires defining the scope of the system to
be studied, and then dividing it into component
parts for identifying and evaluating its problems,
opportunities, constraints, and needs
Glossary
G.13
systems approach  A holistic and analytical
approach to solving complex problems that
includes using a systems philosophy, systems
analysis, and systems management
systems development life cycle (SDLC)  A
framework for describing the phases involved in
developing and maintaining information systems
systems management  Addressing the business,
technological, and organizational issues
associated with creating, maintaining, and
modifying a system
systems philosophy  An overall model for think-
ing about things as systems
systems thinking  A holistic view of an organiza-
tion to effectively handle complex situations
tacit knowledge  Sometimes called informal
knowledge, this type of knowledge is difficult to
express and is highly personal, such as beliefs,
insight, and experience
tangible costs or benefits  Costs or benefits that
can be easily measured in dollars
task  An element of work normally found on the
WBS that has an expected duration, cost, and
resource requirements; also called an activity
team charter  Document to help promote team-
work and clarify team communications
team development  Building individual and
group skills to enhance project performance
termination clause  A contract clause that
allows the buyer or supplier to end the contract
Theory of Constraints (TOC)  A management
philosophy that any complex system at any
point in time often has only one aspect or
constraint that limits the ability to achieve
more of the system's goal
three-point estimate  An estimate that includes
an optimistic, a most likely, and a pessimistic
estimate
time and material (T&M) contracts  A hybrid of
fixed-price and cost-reimbursable contracts
Top Ten Risk Item Tracking  A qualitative risk
analysis tool for identifying risks and maintain-
ing an awareness of risks throughout the life of
a project
top-down approach  Creating a WBS by starting
with the largest items of the project and break-
ing them into subordinate items
top-down estimates  A cost-estimating
technique that uses the actual cost of a previous
similar project as the basis for estimating the
cost of the current project; also called analogous
estimates
total slack (total float)  The amount of time
an activity may be delayed from its early start
without delaying the planned project finish date
Tracking Gantt chart  A Gantt chart that
compares planned and actual project schedule
information
transactional  A leadership style using a man-
agement by exception approach that focuses on
achieving goals or compliance by offering team
members appropriate rewards and punishments
transformational  A leadership style in which
people work with others to identify needed
changes to empower others and guide changes
through inspiration
triggers  Indications for actual risk events
triple constraint  Balancing scope, time, and
cost goals
Tuckman model  A model that describes
five stages of team development: forming,
storming, norming, performing, and
adjourning
unit pricing  An approach in which the buyer
pays the supplier a predetermined amount per
unit of service, and the total value of the con-
tract is a function of the quantities needed to
complete the work
unit test  A test of each individual component
(often a program) to ensure that it is as defect-
free as possible
unknown risks  Risks that cannot be managed
proactively because they have not been
identified and analyzed
unknown unknowns  Dollar amounts included
in a cost estimate to allow for future situations
that are unpredictable (sometimes called
management reserves)
use case modeling  A process for identifying and
modeling business events, who initiated them,
and how the system should respond to them
user acceptance testing  An independent test
performed by end users prior to accepting the
delivered system
user stories  Short descriptions written by
customers of what they need a system to do for
them
Glossary
G.14
variance  The difference between planned and
actual performance
virtual team  A group of people who work
together despite time and space boundaries
using communication technologies
watch list  A list of risks that have low priority
but are still identified as potential risks
WBS dictionary  A document that includes
detailed information about each WBS item
weighted scoring model  A technique that pro-
vides a systematic process for selecting projects
based on numerous criteria
wiki  A website that enables anyone who
accesses it to contribute or modify content
withdrawal mode  Retreating or withdrawing
from an actual or potential disagreement
work breakdown structure (WBS)
A deliverable-oriented grouping of the work
involved in a project that defines its total scope
work package  A task at the lowest level of
the WBS
workarounds  Unplanned responses to risk
events when no contingency plans are in place
yield  The number of units handled correctly
through the development process
Index
Note: Page numbers followed by
f refer to figures; t refer to table,
page numbers in bold refer to key
terms.
A
AACE. See Association for
the Advancement of Cost
Engineering (AACE)
AC. See actual cost (AC)
acceptance decisions, 336
Accounts Payable Invoice
Automation (APIA), 531
ACP. See Agile Certified
Practitioner (ACP)
acquired-needs theory, 383
activity, 244
attributes, 246
list, 246
activity-on-arrow (AOA), 249
actual cost (AC), 307
adaptive life cycle, 64
Adelaide desalination project, 122
ADM. See arrow diagramming
method (ADM)
agile/adaptive environments, 363
project communications
management, 454-455
project cost management,
315-316
project integration
management, 190-191
project procurement
management, 531-532
project resource management,
413
project risk management,
494-495
project schedule management,
274-275
project scope management,
231-232
project stakeholder
management, 554-555
Agile Certified Practitioner
(ACP), 75
agile management, 269-270
agile methods, 93-94
agile movement, 335
agile project management, 231
agile software development, 73
Manifesto for, 73-74
PMBOK certification, 75-76
schedule management, 269
scrum, 74-75
Agile Unified Process (AUP), 94
Alperovitch, Dmitri, 358
American Society for Quality
(ASQ), 341
analogous estimates, 297
analogy approach, 219-220
Anderson, David J., 335
AOA. See activity-on-arrow (AOA)
appraisal cost, 357
Arbon, Jason, 207
arrow diagramming method
(ADM), 249
artifact, 131
Association for the Advancement
of Cost Engineering (AACE),
296
Atlassian, 382
AUP. See Agile Unified Process
(AUP)
automobiles, impressive
technology for, 355
Avraham Y. Goldratt Institute, 268
B
BAC. See budget at completion
(BAC)
backward pass, 262
bad news, communication of,
431-432
BAFO. See best and final offer
(BAFO)
balanced scorecard, 169
Baldrige, Malcolm, 354
bar graph, 340
Basecamp core tools, 450, 451f
baseline, 182, 258, 307
basis of estimates
rules and assumptions,
299-301
WBS category, 301-302
Belbin, Meredith, 408
Belichick, Bill, 60
benchmarking, 208, 334
best and final offer (BAFO), 527
best practices, 20, 468-469
OPM3, 361-362
project management, 122
project procurement
management, 529
project resource management,
399
bid, 520
bidders' conference, 525, 526
bid documents, 519-521
Blackboard, 446
Blizzard, 67
blogs, 453
Bloomberg, Michael, 509
bottom-up approach, WBSs, 220
bottom-up estimates, 297
brainstorming, 477
Branch, Cliff, 464, 495
Braun, Christine, 426, 455
Briggs, Katherine C., 405
Buchanan, Vern, 89
budgetary estimate, 295
budget at completion (BAC), 310
buffer, 266
burndown chart, 131, 137, 138f
bursts, 250
business analysts, jobs, 205
business area analysis, 158
business strategy, 158-159
Butrick, Robert, 21
C
Capability Maturity Model
Integration (CMMI), 360-361
capitalization rate, 162
Carollo, Jeff, 207
cash flow, 163
analysis, 292
catalog management capabilities,
531
cause-and-effect diagrams,
336-337, 337f
Cavanagh, Roland, 344
CCB. See change control board
(CCB)
Certified Business Analysis
Professional (CBAP), 206
Certified Professional for
Requirements Engineering
(CPRE), 206
champion, 60
change control board (CCB), 185
change control system, 185-188
change requests. See also
­integrated change control
CHAOS Report, 3-4, 15
charismatic leadership, 28
checksheets, 339
Chief Information Officer (CIO),
61-62
Chief Project Officer (CPO), 62
Clinton, Bill, 386
closing processes, 87, 90,
126-129, 138-139, 188-189
CMMI. See Capability Maturity
Model Integration (CMMI)
coercive power, 385
collaborating mode, 410
collaboration impact, 439-440
collaborative tools, 445-447
Collins, James, 345
communication(s)
channels, 432-434
management plan, 434
methods and media, 437-440
skills development, 442-443
compromise mode, 410
CompTIA, 377
Computer Aided Software
Engineering (CASE), 66, 229
Index
I.2
computer-mediated
communication, 72
computer viruses, 357
configuration management, 186
conflict management, 73
conformance, 356
conformance to requirements, 330
confrontation mode, 410
constructive change orders, 528
contingency allowances, 472-473
contingency plans, 472
contingency reserves, 293,
472-473
Continuing Certification Require-
ments (CCR) program, 390
contracts
closure, 528
definition, 509
statement of work, 518
types of, 512-516
control charts, 337-338
cost, 287
baseline, 305
of capital, 162
management (See project cost
management)
of nonconformance, 356
of quality, 356-357
cost estimates
basis of estimates, 299-304
budgetary estimate, 295
definitive estimate, 295
IT, 298-299
rough order of magnitude, 295
tools and techniques, 296-298
Cost Estimating in an Agile
Development Environment
(2015), 304
cost management. See project cost
management
cost performance index (CPI), 309
cost plus award fee (CPAF)
contracts, 514
cost plus fixed fee (CPFF)
contracts, 513-514
cost plus incentive fee (CPIF)
contracts, 513
cost plus percentage of costs
(CPPC) contracts, 514, 515
cost-reimbursable contracts, 513
cost variance (CV), 308
Cotton, Brian, 439
Cottrell, Bill, 94
Covey, Stephen, 386-389, 429
CPAF contracts. See cost plus
award fee (CPAF) contracts
CPFF contracts. See cost plus
fixed fee (CPFF) contracts
CPI. See cost performance
index (CPI)
CPIF. See cost plus incentive fee
(CPIF) contracts
CPM. See critical path method
(CPM)
CPO. See Chief Project
Officer (CPO)
CPPC. See cost plus percentage of
costs (CPPC) contracts
crashing, 264
critical chain scheduling, 265-267
critical path, 259
analysis, 259
calculating, 259-260
important updates, 265
make schedule trade-offs,
261-263
project X, 260f
shorten project schedule,
263-264
critical path method (CPM), 259,
268, 491
CRM. See Customer Relationship
Management (CRM)
Crosby, Philip B., 352-353
Crowe, Andy, 88
Crystal, 94
cultural differences in quality, 359
Customer Relationship
Management (CRM), 62
customer testimonials, 273
CV. See cost variance (CV)
D
daily Scrum, 131, 137
Daniels, Scott, 328, 364
Davidson, Ed, 374
decision trees, 485-487
decomposition, 213
defect, 348
Defense Systems Leaders, 541
definitive estimate, 295
Deligiannis, Nick, 510
deliverable, 63, 202
Dell, 508
Delphi car, 355
Delphi technique, 477-478
DeMarco, Tom, 357, 358
Demers, Clement, 122
Deming, W. Edwards, 351
Department of Defense (DOD)
Risk, Issue, and Opportunity
Management Guide, 477
dependency, 248
deputy project managers, 392
design of experiments, 331
development team, 130
DevOps, 4
direct costs, 292
directives, 161
discount factor, 164
discount rate, 162
DISC profile, 407-408
discretionary dependencies, 249
diverse technologies, 68-69
DMADV, 94
DMAIC, 94, 344
DOD guidelines. See Department
of Defense (DOD)
Doran Jones Inc., 507
driverless cars, 355
dummy activities, 252
duration, 253
Dynamic System Development
Method (DSDM), 94
E
EAC. See estimate at completion
(EAC)
early finish date, 262
early start date, 261
earned value (EV), 307
earned value management (EVM),
287
actual cost, 307
budget at completion, 310
cost performance index, 309
cost variance, 308
earned value, 307
estimate at completion, 309
planned value, 307
schedule performance index,
309
schedule variance, 308
to-complete performance
index, 309
e-cigarette chargers, 357, 358
effectiveness, 386-389
effort, 253
e-informing, 530
e-invoicing, 531
e Keirsey Temperament Sorter,
405
Eli Lilly, 489
Ellis, Sarah, 374
e-mail, 445-447
e-marketsites, 530
emotional intelligence, 389-390
Emotional Intelligence
(Goleman), 389
Emotional Intelligence for
Project Managers: The
People Skills You Need to
Achieve Outstanding Results
(Mersino), 389
empathic listening, 387, 388
employment rates, 2-3
e-MRO, 530
EMV. See expected monetary
value (EMV)
Enterprise Applications
Consulting, 226
enterprise project management
(EPM), 39, 455
enterprise resource planning
(ERP), 19
Epic, 95
e-procurement, 530
e-purchasing functionality, 530
e-reverse auctioning, 530
ESI International Inc., 362
e-sourcing, 530
estimate at completion (EAC),
308, 309
e-tendering, 530
Index
I.3
ethics, project management,
36-37
EV. See earned value (EV)
EVM. See earned value
management (EVM)
executing process, 87, 90,
117-121, 136-137
executing processes, 87
Executive Information System
(EIS), 328, 333, 364
executive steering committee, 67
expectations management matrix,
548, 549t
expected monetary value (EMV),
485-487
expert judgment, 517
expert power, 386
explicit knowledge, 181
external dependencies, 249
external failure cost, 357
external project stakeholders, 542
Extreme Programming (XP), 94
extrinsic motivation, 380
F
fallback plans, 472
fast tracking, 264
FBI. See U.S. Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI)
Feature Driven Development
(FDD), 94
features, 333
feeding buffers, 267
Feigenbaum, Armand V., 354
Ferguson, Christa, 546
FFP. See firm-fixed-price (FFP)
contract
Financial Stability Forum
(FSF), 467
finish-to-finish dependency,
251-252
finish-to-start dependency, 251
FireChat app, 437
firm-fixed-price (FFP) contract, 512
fishbone diagrams, 336
fitness for use, 330
5 whys, 336
fixed-price contracts, 512
fixed-price incentive fee (FPIF)
contracts, 512
fixed-price with economic
price adjustment (FP-EPA)
contracts, 512
Flatiron-Manson, 514
Fleming, Joe, 86
float, 259
flowcharts, 341-342
forcing mode, 410
Ford Motor Company, 351, 353
forecasts, 440
formal communication, 430-431
forward pass, 262
14 points for management,
351-352
FP-EPA. See fixed-price with
economic price adjustment
(FP-EPA) contracts
FPIF. See fixed-price incentive fee
(FPIF) contracts
F-44 radar upgrade project, 374
Frames of Mind: The Theory
of Multiple Intelligences
(Gardner), 389
free float, 261
free slack, 261
Friang, Luke, 508
Frost & Sullivan, 439
full-time equivalent (FTE), 296
functionality, 333
functional organizational
structure, 53
Function Point Analysis (FPA), 304
function points, 301
G
Game Chaser app, 507
Gantt charts, 31, 255
milestones to, 257
mind map, 222f
project X, 256f
software development
plan, 32f
software launch project, 256f
tracking Gantt chart, 258
website project, 217f
Gardner, Howard, 389
Gartner, Inc., 5-6
Gates, Bill, 328
General Motors (GM), 328, 489,
508
Gilliland, Peter, 543
global IT workforce, 374-375
globalization, 69-70
Global Positioning System (GPS),
299
Goleman, Daniel, 389, 390
Goodyear, 353
Google, 207, 375, 399
Google Docs, 445, 446, 447
Gottron, Joe, 67
group communication, 428-430
groupthink, 410
Guide to Business Analysis Body
of Knowledge (BABOK
Guide), 206
Guide to Quality Control
(Ishikawa), 353
Gumpert, Peter, 426, 434, 435,
449, 455
H
Hayman, Jason, 375
HEART (guest experience), 62
Herzberg, Frederick, 378, 381-382
Hewlett-Packard, 353, 508
hierarchy of needs, 380-381
Hillson, David, 467, 468
Hilton Worldwide, 62
histogram, 340
The Hobbit, 90
Holloway, Caswell F., 510
Hollstadt, Rachel, 62
How Google Tests Software
(Whittaker), 207
The Huffington Post, 376
human resource management. See
project resource management
human resources (HR) frame, 52
The Human Side of Enterprise,
383
Humphrey, Watts S., 350
Huntington Bancshares, Inc., 67
hybrid life cycle, 64
I
Ibbs, William, 465
IBM, 94, 95
IEEE. See Institute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers
(IEEE)
IEEE Standard Glossary of
Software Engineering
Terminology, 204
incremental life cycle, 64
indirect costs, 292
individual communication,
428-430
influence and power, 384-386
informal communication, 430-431
information technology (IT)
aligning, business strategy,
158-159
best practices, 158
with business strategy,
158-159
common programs, 18-19
cost estimates, 298-299
project management, 2-3
project manager careers, 30
projects, 4-6, 23f
project selection, 161-162
initial contractor responses, 521
initiating process, 87, 89, 101-106
instant messaging, 445-447
Institute for International Finance
(IIF), 467
Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers (IEEE),
176
intangible costs/benefits, 292
integrated change control,
184-188
integration management.
See project integration
management
integration testing, 350
interactional leadership, 28
interactive communication, 437
interface management, 154
Index
I.4
internal dependencies, 249
internal failure cost, 357
internal logical files (ILFs), 304
internal project stakeholders, 542
internal rate of return (IRR), 159,
166
International Institute for
Learning, Inc., 362
International Institute of Business
Analysis (IIBA), 206
International Organization
for Standardization (ISO),
354-355
International Requirements
Engineering Board (IREB), 206
interviewing, 478
intrinsic motivation, 378
invitations for bid, 521
invitations for negotiation, 521
IRR. See internal rate of return
(IRR)
Ishikawa diagrams, 336
Ishikawa, Kaoru, 353
ISO 9000, 354
issue log, 548, 549t
iterative life cycle, 64
IT governance, 61
IT Governance Institute (ITGI), 61
IT human resource management,
375-377
IT projects
agile software development,
73-76
change control on, 185
diverse technologies, 68-69
globalization, 69-70
nature of, 67-68
offshoring, 70-71
organization's commitment,
61-62
outsourcing, 70-71
planning process, 89, 158f
project work management, 179
quality affecting factors,
332-333
scope management, 228
team member characteristics, 68
virtual teams, 71-73
J
Jackson, Peter, 90
Jehn, Karen, 410
Jira agile reporting, 451, 452f
job description, 24-25
Jobs, Steve, 383
Johnson, Jim, 67
Joint Application Design (JAD),
66, 229
Joint Application Development
(JAD), 94
joint requirements planning
(JRP), 66
Judge, Timothy, 57
Juran, Joseph M., 346, 352, 356
JWD Consulting, 86
K
kaizen, 334
Kanban, 75, 334
Kanban (Anderson), 335
kanban boards, 445-447
Kanter, Rosabeth Moss, 20-21
Keirsey, David, 405
Kennedy, John F., 386
kick-off meeting, 105-106
Kidder, Tracy, 387
kill points, 66
KLCI Research Group, 466
knowledge areas, 10f, 11-12
known risks, 470
known unknowns, 293
KPMG survey, 475
Kwak, Young H., 465
L
Laissez-faire leadership, 28
Landry, Jeff, 363
late finish date, 262
late start date, 262
leadership, 390-391
improving project quality, 356
styles, 62, 72, 390
Leadership: Theory and Practice
(Northouse), 390
leaders vs. managers, 28-29
lean, 334
learning curve theory, 293
legitimate power, 385-386
Lencioni, Patrick, 411
lessons-learned report, 449
life cycle costing, 290
Lister, Timothy, 358
Local On-Line Network System
(LONS), 219
Lord of the Rings, 90
lump-sum contracts, 512
M
maintainability, 333
make-or-buy analysis, 516-517
make-or-buy decision, 512
Malcolm Baldrige National Quality
Award, 354
management commitment, 60-61
management reserves, 293, 473
management reviews, 66
managers vs. leaders, 28-29
managing stakeholder
engagement, 548-550
mandatory dependencies, 249
market research, 518
Marston, William Moulton, 407
Martin Luther King, Jr., 386
Maslow, Abraham, 378, 380
massive multiplayer online
(MMO), 67
master services agreement
(MSA), 531
matrix organizational structure, 55
Mattes, Andy, 376
maturity models, 359-362
MBTI. See Myers-Briggs Type
Indicator (MBTI)
McBride, Marie, 506, 532
McClelland, David, 378, 383
McDonnell Aircraft Company, 219
McGregor, Douglas, 378, 383-384
McNealy, Scott, 509
McPherson, Jim, 355
mean, 346
measurement and test equipment
costs, 357
meetings, effective, 443-445
megaproject, 18
Mehrabian, Albert, 430
merge, 250
Mersino, Anthony C., 389
mesh-networking, 437
metric, 331
Metzen, Chris, 67
Meyer, Marissa, 376
Microsoft Corporation, 328
Microsoft Excel, 489
Microsoft Project 2016, 232f, 412
milestone, 246
mind mapping, 157, 221-222
Minnesota Department of
Transportation (MnDOT), 514
mirroring, 388
Money magazine, 443
monitoring and controlling
processes, 87, 90, 182-183,
550-552
Monte Carlo analysis, 487-489
Moodle, 446
Morhaime, Mike, 67
motivation-hygiene theory,
381-382
motivation theories
extrinsic motivation, 380
Herzberg's motivation-hygiene
theory, 381-382
intrinsic motivation, 378
Maslow's hierarchy of needs,
380-381
McClelland's acquired-needs
theory, 383
Motorola, 347, 356
Mott, Randy, 508
multitasking, 265
Murphy's Law, 266
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator
(MBTI), 405-406
Myers, Isabel B., 405
N
NASA International Space Station
Program, 19
National Programme for Health
IT, 287
natural disasters, 437
net present value (NPV), 159,
162-165
Index
I.5
network diagrams, 249-252, 250f
Neuman, Robert, 344
New England Patriots, 60
New Line Cinema, 90
new product development
(NPD), 440
Nguyen, Kim, 202
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone
(NTT) East, 437
node, 249
normal distribution, 346
Northouse, Peter, 390
Northwest Airlines Resnet
project, 335
NPD. See new product
development (NPD)
NPV. See net present value (NPV)
O
OBS. See organizational
breakdown structure (OBS)
OECD. See Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD)
offshoring, 70-71, 506
online course management
software, 446
OpenSource method, 94
OpenUP, 94
OPM3. See Organizational
Project Management Maturity
Model (OPM3)
opportunities, 161
opportunity cost of capital, 162
oral communication, 431
Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and
Development (OECD), 186
organizational breakdown
structure (OBS), 394
organizational charts, 392-394
organizational culture, 57-58
organizational influences,
on quality, 358
organizational process assets, 170
organizational project
management, 21-24
Organizational Project
Management Maturity Model
(OPM3), 20, 361-362
organizations
benefits realization
processes, 291
culture, 57-58
human resources (HR)
frame, 52
IT, development strategy, 158
political frame, 52
requirements management,
212-213
select projects, 161
stakeholders, 542
standards, 62
structural frame, 52,
53-57, 54f
symbolic frame, 53
training and certification
programs for business
analysts, 206
Ouchi, William, 384
Out of the Crisis (Deming), 351
outsourcing, 70-71, 506-510
overallocation, 400, 401
overrun cost, 286
P
Pande, Peter, 344
parametric estimates, 298
Pareto analysis, 340, 341
Pareto chart, 340, 341f
Parkinson's Law, 267
payback period, 166
PDM. See precedence
diagramming method (PDM)
Pell, Philip A., 89
penalty, 385
performance, 333
performance reporting, 440-441
Per Scholas, 507
PERT. See Program Evaluation and
Review Technique (PERT)
PERT weighted average, 269
phase exits, 66
phase gate reviews, 66
Pink, Daniel, 382
planned value (PV), 307
planning processes, 87
case studies, 106-117,
134-136
communications management,
434-436
cost management, 294
integration management,
156-159
procurement management,
512-525
project management process
groups, 87
project quality management,
330-334
project schedule management,
244-246
risk management, 490-493
rolling wave, 247
scope management, 203-205
stakeholder, 546-548
strategic, 156-159
Please Understand Me II:
Temperament, Character,
Intelligence (Keirsey), 405
PMBOK Guide, 12, 14, 93,
95, 106
PMI, 94, 95. See Project
Management Institute (PMI)
PMI Professional in Business
Analysis (PMI-PBA), 206
PMI Risk Management
Professional (PMI-RMP) SM,
464-465
PMI Talent Triangle, 390
PMO. See Project Management
Office (PMO)
PMP. See Project Management
Professional (PMP)
PMP, 89, 122
podcasts, 453
Point of Total Assumption (PTA),
512, 513
political frame, 52
politics, 52
Porras, Jerry, 345
portfolios, 20
management, 19-21
overview of, 22t
power, 385
power/interest grid, 544, 545
Practical Communications,
Inc., 438
Practice Standard for Work
Breakdown Structures, 214
pre-bid conference, 525
precedence diagramming method
(PDM), 251, 252f
predictive life cycle, 64
prevention cost, 356-357
PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC), 95
Primal Leadership
(Goleman), 390
probabilistic time estimates, 268
probability/impact matrix/chart,
480-483
problems, 161
process, 87
process adjustments, 336
process groups. See project
management process groups
Procter & Gamble, 489
procurement, 506
procurement management.
See project procurement
management
procure-to-pay suites, capabilities
of, 530-531
product backlog, 131, 136t
product life cycle, 63-66
product owner, 130
professional certification, 35
profit margin, 290
profits, 290
Program Evaluation and Review
Technique (PERT), 268-269
program manager, 19
programs, 18-19, 22t
progress reports, 440
project
archives, 450
attributes of, 6-7
buffer, 266
charter development, 169-173
constraints, 7-9, 8f
defined, 4
examples of, 4-6
life cycle, 63
management reviews, 66
organizational structure
influences, 56t-57t
overview of, 22t
Index
I.6
project (continued)
portfolio categories, 23
stakeholders, 9-11
success/failure of, 15-18, 17t
project communications
management
goal of, 427
importance of, 426-428
improving, 442-452
keys to good communications,
428-434
managing communications,
436-441
monitoring communications,
441
overview, 427, 428
planning, 434-436
software for, 452-454
project cost control
earned value management,
307-311
project portfolio management,
312-314
project cost management
basic principles of, 288-293
budget, 305-306
control of, 306-314
definition of, 288
estimating costs, 294-304
importance of, 286-288
overview, 289f
planning, 294
software, 314-315
project integration management
closing projects/phases,
188-189
definition and overview,
152-155, 153f
directing and managing project
work, 177-181
integrated change control,
184-188
managing project knowledge,
181
monitoring and controlling
project work, 182-183
project charter management,
169-173
project management plan,
173-177
project selection, 155-159
selection of projects, 160-169
software, 189-190
strategic planning and,
155-159
project knowledge
management, 181
project management. See also
IT projects
advantages, 4
agile, 73-76
certification, 35-36
defined, 9
ethics in, 36-37
globalization, 69-70
history of, 30-34
information technology, 2-3
knowledge areas, 10f, 11-12
organizational project
management, 21-24
outsourcing, 70-71
planning (See planning
processes)
PMI, 34
programs, 18-19
project attributes, 6-7
project manager, 7, 24-30
vs. project portfolio
management, 20f
software development, 37-39
stakeholders, 9-11
success/failure, 15-18
systems, 49-50
systems view of, 49-51
technologies, 2
three-sphere model, 50-51
tools and techniques, 12-15,
13t-14t
triple constraints, 7-9
virtual teams, 71-73
Project Management Body of
Knowledge (PMBOK)
agile software development,
75-76
earned value, 310
final project report, 188-189
leadership styles, 28
organizational structures, 55
portfolios, programs, and
projects, 22t
product life cycle, 64
project charter
development, 170
project integration
management, 152-153
project life cycle, 63
project managers skill, 26
project scope
management, 231
project stakeholder
management, 554-555
requirement, 205
tools and techniques, 12
Project Management Certification,
35-36
Project Management Information
System (PMIS), 136, 180
Project Management Institute
(PMI), 34
ACP, 75
earned value
management, 312
leadership skills, 28-29
reports, 2
student membership, 35
project management maturity
models, 361-362
Project Management Office
(PMO), 32
goals of, 33
IT planning process, 158
project management plan
contents, 174-175
definition, 173
guidelines to create, 176-177
project documents, 174t-175t
project management process
groups, 87
closing process, 87, 90,
126-129, 138-139
executing process, 87, 90,
117-121, 136-137
initiating process, 87, 89,
101-106
knowledge areas, 91-93
methodology, 93-95
monitoring and controlling
process, 87, 90, 122-126,
137-138
planning process, 87, 89,
106-117, 134-136
pre-initiation tasks, 96-100,
133-134
templates, 139-142
Project Management Professional
(PMP), 35, 62
project managers, 7
IT careers for, 30
job description, 24-25
leadership skills, 28-30
management commitment,
60-61
skills for, 26-27
project organizational
structure, 54
project portfolio management
(PPM), 19-21, 312-314
project procurement management
conducting procurements,
525-527
importance of, 506-511
overview, 510, 511
planning, 512-525
software for, 529-531
project quality management
controlling quality, 331,
335-336
importance of, 328-330
improving, 355-362
managing quality, 331
modern quality management,
351-355
overview, 330-331, 332f
planning process, 330-334
processes, 330-331
purpose of, 330
quality assurance, 334
software for, 362-363
project resource management
acquiring resources, 397-403
controlling resources, 412
estimating activity resources,
396-397
human resource management
plan, 391-396
importance of, 374-377
overview, 378, 379f
processes, 377-378
psychosocial issues, 378,
380-391
software for, 412
Index
I.7
team development, 403-408
team management, 409-412
project risk management
identifying risks, 477-481
implementing risk
responses, 493
importance of, 464-472
monitoring risks, 493-494
overview, 470-471
planning, 472-473, 490-493
qualitative risk analysis,
481-485
quantitative risk analysis,
485-490
software for, 494
sources of risk, 474-476
project schedule management
control, 270-272
defining activities, 246-247
estimating activity durations,
253-254
importance of, 242-244
overview, 243, 245f
planning, 244-246
schedule development, 254-270
sequencing activities, 248-252
software, 272-274
project scope management
collecting requirements,
206-209
controlling scope, 227-230
overview, 202-203, 202f
planning, 203-205
scope, 209-212
software and, 230-231
validating scope, 224-226
work breakdown structure,
213-224
project scope statements, 210
project selection
balanced scorecard, 169
categorizing IT projects,
161-162
focusing on broad organizational
needs, 160-161
net present value analysis,
162-165
payback analysis, 166-167
return on investment, 165-166
weighted scoring model,
167-169
PRojects IN Controlled
Environments (PRINCE2), 93
project sponsor, 7
project stakeholder management
identifying stakeholders,
541-546
importance of, 540-542
managing stakeholder
engagement, 541, 548-550
monitoring stakeholder
engagement, 541, 550-552
overview, 542f
planning stakeholder
engagement, 541, 546-548
processes, 541
software for, 553-554
project work management
IT project, 179
planning and execution, 178
project execution tools and
techniques, 180-181
strong leadership, 178-179
supportive organizational
culture, 178-179
proposal, 520
proposal evaluation sheets, 526
prototyping, 229
prototyping life cycle model, 65
PTA. See Point of Total
Assumption (PTA)
Public Transport Users
Association (PTUA), 227
pull communication, 438
Pulse of the Profession:
Capturing the Value of Project
Management 2015, 178
purchasing, 506
push communication, 437-438
PV. See planned value (PV)
Q
quadruple constraint, 9
quality, 330
assurance, 334
audit, 335
circles, 353
quality control, 335, 336
tools and techniques for,
336-350
Quality Control Handbook
(Juran), 352
Quality Is Free (Crosby), 352
quality management. See project
quality management
Quality Management Process
Maturity Grid, 353
Quartier International de
Montréal (QIM) project, 122
R
RACI charts, 394, 395t
RAD. See Rapid Application
Development (RAD)
RAD life cycle model, 65-66
RAM. See responsibility
assignment matrix (RAM)
Rapid Application Development
(RAD), 64, 94
rapport, 388
Rational Unified Process (RUP)
framework, 94
Reachi device, 437
referent power, 386
relationship, 248
reliability, 333
Request for Information
(RFI), 520
Request for Proposal (RFP), 393,
520, 521, 521t-524t
Request for Quote (RFQ), 520
required rate of return, 165
requirements, 205, 229-230
requirements management
plan, 205
requirements traceability matrix
(RTM), 209, 209t
reserves, 293
residual risks, 493
resource assignment, 398
resource breakdown structure,
244, 397
resource histograms, 395
resource leveling, 401-403
resource loading, 399-401, 400
responsibility assignment matrix
(RAM), 394-395, 394t
return on collaboration
(ROC), 440
return on investment (ROI),
165-166, 290
reward power, 386
rework, 336
RFP. See Request for Proposal (RFP)
RFQ. See Request for
Quote (RFQ)
risk, 467-468
acceptance, 491, 492
avoidance, 491
breakdown structure,
474-475, 476f
vs. contract types, 515
enhancement, 492
escalation, 491, 492
events, 478-479
exploitation, 491-492
factors, 482
management plan, 472-473
mitigation, 491
owner, 480
preference, 469f
register, 478-480
report, 480-481
sharing, 492
transference, 491
utility, 469
utility function, 469f
risk-averse person/
organization, 469
risk information technologies and
services (RITS), 467
risk management. See project risk
management
risk-neutral person/
organization, 469
risk-seeking, 469
Robbins, Stephen P., 57
Robust Design methods, 353-354
ROI. See return on
investment (ROI)
rolling wave planning, 247
Ross, Douglas, 387
Ross, Jeanne, 61
rough order of magnitude (ROM)
estimate, 295
Index
I.8
RSA Animate, 382
RTM. See requirements
traceability matrix (RTM)
run charts, 342
RUP. See Rational Unified Process
(RUP) framework
S
Salt Lake Organizing Committee
(SLOC), 183
Sanderson, Peter, 514
Satisfaction and Loyalty Tracking
(SALT), 62
Scaled Agile Framework, 94
scatter diagrams, 339
schedule baseline, 258
schedule development processes
agile and schedule
management, 269-270
CPM, 259
critical chain scheduling,
265-267
critical path calculation,
259-260
critical path to project
schedule, 263-264
Gantt charts, 255-256
make schedule trade-offs,
261-263
milestones to Gantt
charts, 257
program evaluation and review
technique, 268-269
project's critical path, 261
tracking Gantt chart, 258-259
updating critical path
data, 265
schedule performance index
(SPI), 309
schedules. See project schedule
management
schedule variance (SV), 308
Schlichter, John, 361
scope, 202
baseline, 213
control, 227-230
creep, 225
defining, 209-212
validation, 224-226
scope management. See project
scope management
Scrum, 94, 130-131
framework, 74-75, 74f, 132f
team, 130
unique activities, 132f-133f
Scrumban, 94
ScrumMaster, 130, 131, 137
SDLC. See systems development
life cycle (SDLC)
secondary risks, 493
SEI. See Software Engineering
Institute (SEI)
selection of projects. See project
selection
sensitivity analysis, 489-490
Sentinel project, 269
servant leadership, 28
Seven Basic Tools of Quality,
336-342
The 7 Habits of Highly Effective
People: Powerful Lessons in
Personal Change (Covey),
386, 429
seven run rule, 338
SharePoint portal, 445
Silent Messages (Mehrabian), 430
simulation, 487-489
Six Sigma, 344-348
conversion table, 347, 348
and defective units, 347
methodologies, 94-95
principles, 345
project selection and
management, 346
and statistics, 346-348
The Six Sigma Way, 344
six 9s of quality, 348
skills gap, 377
Skjødt, Pernille, 437
slack, 259
slipped milestone, 259
SMART criteria, 257
smoothing mode, 410
social media blunders, 443
Social Styles Profile, 406, 407f
software
agile software development,
73-74
defect, 350
development projects, 206
engineering steps, 205
online course management
software, 446
for project communications
management, 452-454
project cost management,
314-315
project integration
management, 189-190
for project quality
management, 362-363
for project resource
management, 412
project schedule management,
272-274
project scope management,
230-231
project stakeholder
management, 553-554
risk management practices,
benefits from, 466f
Software Engineering Institute
(SEI), 360
Software Project Management
Plan (SPMP), 176
Software Quality Function
Deployment (SQFD) model, 360
Sorel, Tom, 514
The Soul of a New Machine, 387
source selection criteria, 524-525
SOW. See statement of work
(SOW)
SPI. See schedule performance
index (SPI)
spiral life cycle model, 65, 65f
sprint, 130
backlog, 131, 136t
planning session, 131
retrospectives, 131, 138
reviews, 131
SQFD. See Software Quality
Function Deployment (SQFD)
model
staffing management plans, 395
stakeholder(s), 9-11
analysis, 544, 547
communications analysis,
434, 435t
management commitment,
60-61
organizational commitment to
IT, 61-62
organizational standards, 62
stakeholder management.
See project stakeholder
management
stakeholder register, 101, 541,
543, 544
standard deviation, 346
standards, 93
Standish Group, 3-4, 15,
66, 474
start-to-finish dependency, 252
start-to-start dependency, 251
Startup Box, 507
statement of work (SOW),
518-519
statistical sampling, 342-343
status reports, 440
status review meetings, 441
Stougaard, Ida, 437
strategic and business
management, 391
strategic planning, 156-157
stratification, 342
structural frame, 52
subproject managers, 392
sunk cost, 292
Sun Microsystems, Inc., 509
supplier conference, 525
suppliers, 506
Surveyor Pro project
cost baseline, 305f
software development
estimate, 303f
SV. See schedule variance (SV)
SWOT analysis, 156-157,
157f, 478
synergy, 386
systems
analysis, 49
approach, 49-50
management, 49, 50-51, 50t
outputs, 333
philosophy, 49
testing, 350
thinking, 49
systems development life cycle
(SDLC), 64-65
Index
I.9
T
tacit knowledge, 181
Taguchi, Genichi, 353
tangible costs/benefits, 292
task, 244
task dependency, 251f
task-technology fit, 72
TAT. See Thematic Apperception
Test (TAT)
team-building activities, 404
DISC profile, 407-408
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator
(MBTI), 405-406
reward and recognition
systems, 408
Social Styles Profile, 406, 407f
team charters, 395-396
team development, 403-408
team life cycles, 72
team management, 409-412
technology
creating and distributing
information, 436
information technology (see
information technology
(IT))
telecommuting, 376
templates, 139-142, 448-452
tender/quote, 520
termination clause, 516
Tesla Motors Inc., 508
testing, 348-350
texting, 445-447
Thamhain, H. J., 378, 384, 385
Thematic Apperception Test
(TAT), 383
Theory of Constraints (TOC), 265
Theory X, 383-384
Theory Y, 383-384
Theory Z, 384
Theory Z: How American
Business Can Meet the
Japanese Challenge, 384
three-point estimate, 253, 297
time and material (T&M)
contracts, 515
time management. See project
schedule management
Titanic factor, 484-485
T&M contracts. See time and
material (T&M) contracts
TOC. See Theory of Constraints
(TOC)
to-complete performance index
(TCPI), 309
tools and techniques, 12-15
cost estimation, 296-298
for managing project teams,
409-410
for planning procurement
management, 516-518
project execution, 180-181
for quality control, 336-350
top-down approach, WBSs, 220
top-down estimates, 297
Top Ten Risk Item Tracking,
483-484
total float, 261
total quality control (TQC), 354
Total Quality Control:
Engineering and
Management
(Feigenbaum), 354
total slack, 261
TQC. See total quality control
(TQC)
tracking Gantt chart, 258-259
training, 403-404
transactional leadership, 28
transformational leadership, 28
triggers, 479
triple constraint, 7, 8f, 247
Tuckman, Bruce, 403
Tuckman model, 403
U
unit pricing, 515
unit test, 349
unknown risks, 470
unknown unknowns, 293
Urban Development Center
(UDC) model, 507
urban onshoring, 507
U.S. Air Force, 219
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics,
3, 205
U.S. Department of Defense
(DOD), 176, 219
use case modeling, 229
user acceptance testing, 350
user input, 228-229
user stories, 135
U.S. Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI), 248
U.S. Federal Reserve, 329
U.S. Internal Revenue Service
(IRS), 89
V
variance, 227
virtual teams, 71
advantages of, 71
disadvantages of, 72
goals, 72-73
W
Walmart, 507, 508
watch list, 484
waterfall life cycle model,
64-65, 65f
Water, Sydney, 61
WBS. See work breakdown
structure (WBS)
WBS dictionary, 223
Web-based ERP, 530
webcasts, 453
weighted scoring model, 167-169
Weill, Peter, 61
Wells Fargo bank, 329
White, Donald, 541
Whittaker, James, 207
wiki, 445-446
Wilemon, D. L., 378, 384, 385
withdrawal mode, 410
workarounds, 494
work breakdown structure (WBS),
213, 393, 435-436, 474, 491
analogy approach, 219-220
basis of estimates, 301-302
bottom-up approach, 220
dictionary, 223, 224
mind mapping, 221-222
sample intranet, 214f
software development
project, 216f
top-down approach, 220
using guidelines, 219
website project Gantt
chart, 217f
work definition and assignment
process, 393
work from home, 376
work package, 215
workplace factors, on quality, 358
X
Xerox, 353
Y
Yahoo, 376
yield, 348
YouTube, 453
Z
zero defects, 352-353
Zuckerburg, Mark, 329
Zulily, 508