C H A P T E R 10
PROJECT COMMUNICATIONS
MANAGEMENT
L E A R N I N G O B J E C T I V E S
After reading this chapter, you will be able to:
-
-
-
-
10.1 THE IMPORTANCE OF PROJECT COMMUNICATIONS
MANAGEMENT
Many experts agree that the greatest threat to the success of any project, especially IT
projects, is a failure to communicate. Many problems in other knowledge areas, such as
an unclear scope or unrealistic schedules, indicate problems with communication. It is
crucial for project managers and their teams to make good communication a priority,
especially with top management and other key stakeholders.
The IT field is constantly changing, and these changes come with a great deal of
technical jargon. When computer professionals communicate with people who aren't as
proficient with or knowledgeable about computers-a group that includes many business
professionals and senior managers-technical jargon can often complicate matters and
create confusion. Even though most people use computers today, the gap between users
and developers increases as technology advances. This gap in knowledge and experience
causes some of the communication problems between technical professionals and their
business colleagues. Of course, not every computer professional is a poor communicator,
but most people in any field can improve their communication skills.
In addition, many educational systems for IT graduates promote strong technical skills
over strong communication and social skills. Most IT-related degree programs have many
O P E N I N G C A S E
Peter Gumpert worked his way up the corporate ladder in a large telecommunications
company. He was intelligent, competent, and a strong leader, but the company's new
fiber-optic undersea telecommunications program was much larger and more compli-
cated than anything he had previously worked on, let alone managed. This program
consisted of several distinct projects, and Peter was in charge of overseeing them all. The
changing marketplace for undersea telecommunications systems and the large number
of projects involved made communications and flexibility critical concerns for Peter. For
missing milestone and completion dates, his company would suffer financial penalties
ranging from thousands of dollars per day for smaller projects to more than $250,000 per
day for larger projects. Many projects depended on the success of other projects, so Peter
had to understand and actively manage those critical interfaces.
Peter held several informal and formal discussions with the project managers who
reported to him on the program. He worked with them and his project executive assis-
tant, Christine Braun, to develop a communications plan for the program. He was still
unsure, however, about the best way to distribute information and manage all of the in-
evitable changes that would occur. He also wanted to develop consistent ways for project
managers to develop their plans and track performance without stifling their creativity
and autonomy. Christine suggested that they consider using some new communica-
tions technologies to keep important project information up to date and synchronized.
Although Peter knew a lot about telecommunications and laying fiber-optic lines, he was
not an expert in using information technology (IT) to improve the communication pro-
cess. In fact, that was part of the reason he had asked Christine to be his assistant. Could
they really develop a process for communicating that would be flexible and easy to use?
Time was of the essence, as more projects were being added to the fiber-optic undersea
telecommunications program every week.
technical requirements, but few require courses in communications (speaking, writing, lis-
tening), psychology, sociology, and the humanities. People often assume that learning these
soft skills is easy, but they are important skills, so people must learn and develop them.
Many studies have shown that IT professionals need these soft skills just as much or even
more than other skills. You cannot totally separate technical skills and soft skills when working
on IT projects. For projects to succeed, every project team member needs both types of skills,
and needs to develop them continuously through formal education and on-the-job training.
Studies continue to show a high demand for IT professionals and the importance of
good communication and business skills. According to a 2014 article in the International
Journal of Business and Social Science:
Organizations are looking for workers with the correct mix of technical, soft, and
business skills.
The most important non-technical skills are problem solving, team work,
listening, the ability to adapt to new technologies and languages, time man-
agement, the ability to transfer knowledge to application, multitasking, verbal
communication, the ability to visualize and conceptualize, "be the customer"
mentality, interpersonal skills, understanding business culture, inter-team
communication, and give and receive constructive criticism.
"The need for these non-technical skills is so great that some IT companies
indicate that they will hire individuals with minimum technical skills so long
as they demonstrate solid soft and business skills."1
This chapter highlights keys to good communications, describes the processes of proj-
ect communications management, provides suggestions for improving communications,
and describes how software can assist in project communications management.
The goal of project communications management is to ensure timely and appropri-
ate generation, collection, dissemination, storage, and disposition of project information.
There are three main processes in project communications management:
1. Planning communications management involves determining the informa-
tion and communications needs of the stakeholders. Who needs what infor-
mation? When will they need it? How will the information be given to them?
The outputs of this process include a communications management plan and
project documents updates.
2. Managing communications involves creating, distributing, storing, retriev-
ing, and disposing of project communications based on the communications
management plan. The main outputs of this process are project communica-
tions, project documents updates, project management plan updates, and or-
ganizational process assets updates. Recall from Chapter 4 that organizational
process assets include formal and informal plans, policies, procedures, guide-
lines, information systems, financial systems, management systems, lessons
learned, and historical information. These assets help people understand, fol-
low, and improve business processes in an organization.
3. Controlling communications involves monitoring and controlling project
communications to ensure that stakeholder communication needs are met.
Figure 10-1 summarizes these processes and outputs, showing when they occur in a
typical project.
392
10.2 KEYS TO GOOD COMMUNICATIONS
Project managers say they spend as much as 90 percent of their time communicating.
Just as it is difficult to understand people and their motivations, it is also difficult to
communicate with people effectively. Several important concepts can help, such as
focusing on individual and group communication needs, using formal and informal
methods for communicating, providing important information in an effective and timely
manner, setting the stage for communicating bad news, and understanding communica-
tion channels.
10.2a Focusing on Group and Individual Communication Needs
Many top managers think they can just add more people to a project that is falling be-
hind schedule. Unfortunately, this approach often causes more setbacks because of the
increased complexity of communications. In his popular book The Mythical Man-Month,
Frederick Brooks illustrates this concept very clearly.2 People are not interchangeable
parts. You cannot assume that a task scheduled to take two months of one person's time
can be done in one month by two people. A popular analogy is that you cannot take nine
women and produce a baby in one month!
It is important to understand individual and group preferences for communica-
tions. As you learned in Chapter 9, people have different personality traits that often
affect their communication preferences. For example, if you want to praise a project
team member for doing a good job, most introverts would be more comfortable receiv-
ing that praise in private, while most extroverts would like everyone to hear about
Planning
Process: Plan communications management
Outputs: Communications management plan, project documents updates
Executing
Process: Manage communications
Outputs: Project communications, project documents updates, project

management plan updates, and organizational process assets

updates
Monitoring and Controlling
Process: Control communications
Outputs: Work performance information, change requests, project

documents updates, and organizational process assets updates
Project Start
Project Finish
FIGURE 10-1

395
need to use all of these dimensions in their daily routines. In addition, different people
respond positively to different levels or types of communication. For example, a project
sponsor may prefer to stay informed through informal discussions held once a week over
coffee. The project manager needs to be aware of this preference and take advantage of
it. The project sponsor will give better feedback about the project during these informal
talks than through some other form of communication. Informal conversations allow the
project sponsor to exercise a leadership role and provide insights and information that
are critical to the success of the project and the organization as a whole. Short face-to-
face meetings are often more effective than electronic communications, particularly for
sensitive information.
10.2c Distributing Important Information in an Effective
and Timely Manner
It is important to include detailed technical information that affects critical performance
features of products or services developed in a project. It is even more important to
document any changes in technical specifications that might affect product performance.
For example, if the fiber-optic undersea telecommunications program described in the
chapter's opening case included a project to purchase and provide special diving gear,
and the supplier of the oxygen tanks enhanced the tanks so divers could stay under
water longer, other people would need to know about this important new capability.
The information should not be buried in an attachment with the supplier's new product
brochure.
People have a tendency to avoid reporting bad news. If the oxygen tank vendor was
behind on production, the person in charge of the project to purchase the tanks might
wait until the last minute to report this critical information. This news could be deliv-
ered quickly via text through a website, e-mail, text message, or similar means. However,
people tend to become overwhelmed by too much information, and they might not under-
stand what it means to them on their particular project.
Oral communication via meetings and informal talks helps bring important
information-positive or negative-into the open. Because IT projects often require a lot
of coordination, it is a good idea to have short, frequent meetings. For example, some IT
project managers require all project personnel to attend a "stand-up" meeting every week
or even every morning, depending on project needs. Stand-up meetings have no chairs,
which forces people to focus on what they need to communicate. Recall that projects us-
ing an agile approach have daily meetings to make sure everyone is on the same page. If
people can't meet face to face, they can have virtual meetings instead.
10.2d Setting the Stage for Communicating Bad News
It is important to put information in context, especially if it's bad news. If there is a
problem, know how it will affect the whole project and the organization. Bad news might
seem like a major setback, but you can recommend steps to take to mitigate a problem.
Project sponsors and other senior managers want to know that you have evaluated the
impact of the situation, considered alternatives, and made a recommendation based on
your expertise. Project managers should know how a major problem might affect the
bottom line of the organization and be able to use their leadership skills to handle the
challenge.

397
send an e-mail to a very large team of people just as you could to a small one, one CIO
answered, "As a group increases in size, you have a whole slew of management challenges.
Communicating badly exponentially increases the possibility of making fatal mistakes.
A large-scale project has a lot of moving parts, which makes it that much easier to break
down. Communication is the oil that keeps everything working properly. It's much easier
to address an atmosphere of distrust among a group of five team members than it is with a
team of 500 members."4
However, in some situations you cannot have face-to-face meetings and must e-mail a
large group of people. Many IT professionals work on virtual projects in which they never
meet their project sponsors, other team members, or other project stakeholders. In a vir-
tual project environment, it is crucial for project managers to develop clear communica-
tion procedures. They must use e-mail, web conferencing, instant messaging, discussion
threads, project websites, and other technologies to communicate most information. They
might be able to use phone calls or other media occasionally, but in general, they must
rely on good written communications.
As you can see, project communication involves more than creating and sending sta-
tus reports or holding periodic meetings. Many good project managers know their personal
strengths and weaknesses in this area and surround themselves with people who comple-
ment their skills, just as Peter Gumpert did in the opening case by asking Christine to be
his assistant. It is good practice to share the responsibility for project communications
management with the entire project team.
3 people, 3 communication channels
2 people, 1 communication channel
4 people, 6 communication channels, etc.
number of communication channels = n(n - 1)
2
FIGURE 10-2
398
10.3 PLANNING COMMUNICATIONS MANAGEMENT
Because communication is so important on projects, every project should include a
communications management plan-a document that guides project communications.
This plan should be part of the overall project management plan, as you learned in
Chapter 4, Project Integration Management. The communications management plan var-
ies with the needs of the project, but some type of written plan should always be prepared.
For small projects, such as the project management intranet site project described in
Chapter 3, the communications management plan can be part of the team contract. For
large projects, it should be a separate document. The communications management plan
should address the following items:

1. Stakeholder communications requirements

2. Information to be communicated, including format, content, and level of
detail

3. Who will receive the information and who will produce it

4. Suggested methods or technologies for conveying the information

5. Frequency of communication

6. Escalation procedures for resolving issues

7. Revision procedures for updating the communications management plan

8. A glossary of common terminology
It is important to know what kinds of information will be distributed to particular
stakeholders. By analyzing stakeholder communication needs, you can avoid wasting time
or money on creating or disseminating unnecessary information.
Table 10-1 provides part of a sample stakeholder communications analysis that shows
which stakeholders should get particular written communications. Note that the stake-
holder communications analysis includes columns that list the contact person for the
information, when the information is due, and the preferred format for the information.
Notice that the first stakeholder, customer management, wants a hard copy of the monthly
status reports plus a meeting to talk about them. You can create a similar table to show
which stakeholders should attend particular formal project meetings. It is always a good
idea to include comment sections with these types of tables to record special consider-
ations or details related to each stakeholder, document, meeting, or other component.
Have stakeholders review and approve the stakeholder communications analysis to ensure
that the information is correct and useful.
Many projects do not include enough initial information on communications. Project
managers, top management, and project team members often assume that using exist-
ing communication channels to relay project information is sufficient. The problem with
using existing channels is that each group (as well as other stakeholders) has different
communication needs. Creating some sort of communications management plan and
reviewing it with project stakeholders early in a project helps prevent or reduce later
communication problems. If an organization works on many projects, developing some
consistency in handling project communications helps the organization run smoothly.
Consistent communication helps organizations improve project communications,
especially for programs composed of multiple projects. For example, Peter Gumpert, the
program manager in the opening case, would benefit greatly from having a communica-
tions management plan that all of his project managers help develop and follow. Because
399
several of the projects have some of the same stakeholders, it is even more important to
develop a coordinated communications management plan. For example, if customers re-
ceive status reports from Peter's company that have totally different formats and do not
coordinate information from related projects within the same company, they will question
the ability of Peter's company to manage large programs.
Information about the content of essential project communications comes from the
work breakdown structure (WBS). In fact, many WBSs include a section for project com-
munications to ensure that reporting key information is a project deliverable. If reporting
essential information is an activity defined in the WBS, it becomes even more important
to know what project information to report, when to report it, how to report it, and who is
responsible for generating the report.
10.4 MANAGING COMMUNICATIONS
Managing communications is a large part of a project manager's job. Getting project infor-
mation to the right people at the right time and in a useful format is just as important as
developing the information in the first place. The stakeholder communications analysis
serves as a good starting point for managing communications. Project managers and their
teams must decide who receives particular information, but they must also determine the
best way to create and distribute the information. Is it sufficient to send written reports
for project information? Is text appropriate, or would visuals or even videos communicate
the information better? Are meetings alone effective in distributing some project informa-
tion? Are meetings and written communications both required for project information?
What is the best way to provide information to virtual team members?
TABLE 10-1
Stakeholders
Document
Name
Document
Format
Contact Person
Due
Customer
management
Monthly status
report
Hard copy
and meeting
Tina Erndt,
Tom Silva
First of month
Customer business
staff
Monthly status
report
Hard copy
Julie Grant,
Sergey Cristobal
First of month
Customer
technical staff
Monthly status
report
E-mail
Li Chau,
Nancy Michaels
First of month
Internal
management
Monthly status
report
Hard copy and
meeting
Bob Thomson
First of month
Internal business
and technical staff
Monthly status
report
Intranet
Angie Liu
First of month
Training
subcontractor
Training plan
Hard copy
Jonathan Kraus
November 1
Software
subcontractor
Software
implementation
plan
E-mail
Najwa Gates
June 1
Comments: Put the titles and dates of documents in e-mail headings and have recipients acknowledge
receipt.
Cengage Learning 2016

Many people use the two terms interchangeably, but some people distinguish between
them as follows:
Progress reports describe what the project team has accomplished during a
certain period. Many projects have each team member prepare a monthly report
or sometimes a weekly progress report. Team leaders often create consolidated
progress reports based on the information received from team members. A sam-
ple template for a monthly progress report is provided later in this chapter.
Status reports describe where the project stands at a specific point in time. Sta-
tus reports address where the project stands in terms of the triple constraint,
meeting scope, time, and cost goals. How much money has been spent to
date? How long did it take to do certain tasks? Is work being accomplished as
planned? Status reports can take various formats depending on the stakehold-
ers' needs. As described in Chapter 2, when using agile project management,
progress is communicated via daily Scrum meetings and burndown charts.
Forecasts predict future project status and progress based on past information and
trends. How long will it take to finish the project based on how things are going? How
much more money will be needed to complete the project? Project managers can use
earned value management (see Chapter 7, Project Cost Management) to answer these
questions by estimating the budget at completion and projected completion date based on
how the project is progressing.
An important technique for performance reporting is the status review meeting. Sta-
tus review meetings, as described in Chapter 4, Project Integration Management, are a
good way to highlight information provided in important project documents, empower
people to be accountable for their work, and have face-to-face discussions about important
project issues. Many program and project managers hold periodic status review meetings
to exchange important project information and motivate people to make progress on their
parts of the project. Likewise, many top managers hold monthly or quarterly status review
meetings in which program and project managers must report overall status information.
Status review meetings sometimes become battlegrounds where conflicts between dif-
ferent parties come to a head. Project managers or higher-level top managers should set
ground rules for status review meetings to control the amount of conflict and should work
to resolve any potential problems. It is important to remember that project stakeholders
should work together to address performance problems.
10.5 CONTROLLING COMMUNICATIONS
The main goal of controlling communications is to ensure the optimal flow of informa-
tion throughout the entire project life cycle. The main inputs are the project management
plan, project communications, issue logs, work performance data, and organizational
process assets. (Issue logs are described in Chapter 13, Project Stakeholder Management.)
The project manager and project team should use their various reporting systems, expert
judgment, and meetings to assess how well communications are working. If communica-
tion problems exist, the project manager and team need to take action, which often re-
quires changes to the earlier processes of planning and managing project communications.
The main outputs of controlling communications are work performance information,
change requests, project documents updates, and organizational process assets updates.
It is often beneficial to have a facilitator from outside the project team assess how well
communications are working. A facilitator can also help the team solve any communica-
tion problems. Many project teams need help in improving communications, and many
internal and external experts are available to help. The following section also provides sug-
gestions for improving project communications.
10.6 SUGGESTIONS FOR IMPROVING PROJECT
COMMUNICATIONS
Good communication is vital to the management and success of IT projects. So far in
this chapter, you have learned that project communications management can ensure
that essential information reaches the right people at the right time, that feedback and
reports are appropriate and useful, and that there are formalized processes for plan-
ning, managing, and controlling communications. This section highlights a few areas
that all project managers and project team members should consider in their quests to
improve project communications. This section provides guidelines for developing better
communication skills, running effective meetings, using e-mail, instant messaging, tex-
ting, kanban boards, and collaborative tools effectively, and using templates for project
communications.
10.6a Developing Better Communication Skills
Some people seem to be born with great communication skills. Others seem to have a
knack for picking up technical skills. It is rare to find someone with a natural ability for
both. Both types of skills, however, can be developed. Most IT professionals enter the field
because of their technical skills. Most find, however, that communication skills are the key
to advancing in their careers, especially if they want to become good project managers.
Most companies spend a lot of money on technical training for their employees, even
when employees might benefit more from communications training. Individuals are also
more likely to enroll voluntarily in classes to learn the latest technology than in classes
that develop soft skills.
Communication skills training usually includes role-playing activities in which par-
ticipants learn concepts such as building rapport, as described in Chapter 9, Project Hu-
man Resource Management. Training sessions also give participants a chance to develop
specific skills in small groups. Sessions that focus on presentation skills typically use video
to record the participants' presentations. Most people are surprised to see some of their
mannerisms and enjoy the challenge of improving their skills. A minimal investment in
communication and presentation training can have a tremendous payback to individuals,
their projects, and their organizations.
As organizations become more global, they realize that they must also invest in ways
to improve communication with people from different countries and cultures. For exam-
ple, Apple released their new 2015 operating system, which included hundreds of diverse
emojis to appeal to users all over the world.
Many Americans are raised to speak their minds, while in some other cultures people
are offended by outspokenness. Decision makers from several countries, such as China,
focus on building personal relationships and trust rather than on facts and quick re-
sponses, like Americans. Not understanding how to communicate effectively with people
of other cultures and diverse backgrounds hurts projects and businesses. Many training

need approval from a top manager to hire another person for the project team.
It could take a week or longer to schedule even a 10-minute meeting on the top
manager's calendar. Instead, an e-mail or phone call describing the situation and
justifying the request is a faster, more effective approach than having a meeting.
However, you often do need a face-to-face meeting in certain situations because
using e-mail or a phone call would be inappropriate. Consider which medium
would be most effective.
Define the purpose and intended outcome of the meeting. Be specific about
what should happen as a result of the meeting. Is the purpose to brainstorm
ideas, provide status information, or solve a problem? Make the purpose of a
meeting very clear to all meeting planners and participants. For example, if a
project manager calls a meeting of all project team members without know-
ing the true purpose of the meeting, everyone will focus on their own agendas
and very little will be accomplished. All meetings should have a purpose and
intended outcome.
Determine who should attend the meeting. Do certain stakeholders have to
be at a meeting to make it effective? Should only the project team leaders
attend a meeting, or should the entire project team be involved? Many meet-
ings are most effective with the minimum number of participants possible,
especially if decisions must be made. Other meetings require many attend-
ees. It is important to determine who should attend a meeting based on its
purpose and intended outcome.
Provide an agenda to participants before the meeting. Meetings are most
effective when the participants come prepared. Did they read reports before
the meeting? Did they collect necessary information? Some professionals re-
fuse to attend meetings if they do not have an agenda ahead of time. Insisting
on an agenda forces meeting organizers to plan the meeting and gives poten-
tial participants the chance to decide whether they need to attend.
Prepare handouts and visual aids, and make logistical arrangements
ahead of time. By creating handouts and visual aids, you must organize
thoughts and ideas. This usually helps the entire meeting run more effec-
tively. It is also important to make logistical arrangements by booking an
appropriate room, having necessary equipment available, and providing re-
freshments or entire meals, if appropriate. It takes time to plan for effective
meetings. Project managers and their team members must take time to pre-
pare for meetings, especially important ones with key stakeholders.
Run the meeting professionally. Introduce people, restate the purpose of
the meeting, and state any ground rules that attendees should follow. Have
someone facilitate the meeting to make sure that important items are dis-
cussed, watch the time, encourage participation, summarize key issues, and
clarify decisions and action items. Designate someone to take minutes and
then send them to all participants soon after the meeting. Minutes should
be short and focus on the crucial decisions and action items from the
meeting.
Set the ground rules for the meeting. State up front how the meeting will be
run. For example, can people speak at will, or will the facilitator lead discus-
sions? Can attendees use their laptops or other electronic devices during the

documents, spreadsheets, and presentations online. A wiki is a website that enables any-
one who accesses it to contribute to or modify its content. Kanban boards visually show
tasks that need to be done, are in progress, or are completed. They have become a popular
tool to improve communications, as described in the Best Practice feature.
Even if people do know when to use e-mail or other tools for project communications,
they also need to know how to use the tools. New features are added to software programs
with every release, but often users are unaware of these features and do not receive train-
ing on how to use them. Do you know how to organize and file your e-mail messages, or
do you have hundreds of them in your inbox? Do you know how to use your address book
or how to create distribution lists? Have you ever used sorting features to find e-mail mes-
sages or documents by date, author, or key words? Do you use filtering software to prevent
spam? Do you know how to share your desktop with instant messaging to teach some-
one how to use software on your computer? Do you know how to track and incorporate
changes in Google Docs to create reports and spreadsheets as a collaborative effort? Does
everyone on your project team know how to use important features of your SharePoint
portal or wiki? Are you using a software tool for creating kanban boards that is tailored to
meet your needs? Project teams and organizations that emphasize using a shared reposi-
tory for good communications are often more productive. Many project management soft-
ware tools include the ability to share project documents and other communications, but
processes must be established first and followed.
Something as simple as a standard college course illustrates these issues. Many college
courses now use online course management software like Moodle or Blackboard. Instruc-
tors have learned to post the course syllabus, handouts, lecture notes, and other docu-
ments for the entire class to share. Students are often required to take quizzes, participate
in discussions, and post their own files on a central site. Posting all information in one
location enhances communications. If the instructor states in the syllabus that students
must check their e-mail frequently for course information, they will do so, even though
they might prefer to use text messaging. If they fail to check their e-mail, participate in
discussions, or generally use the online course tools, the consequences will affect their
grades.
Even if you know how to use all the features of these communication systems, you
will likely still need to learn how to put ideas into words clearly and effectively. For exam-
ple, the subject line for any e-mail message you write should clearly state the intention of
the e-mail. Folder and file names for collaborative projects should be clear and follow file
naming conventions, if provided. A business professional who does not write well might
prefer to talk to people than to send an e-mail or instant message. Poor writing often leads
to misunderstandings and confusion.
Project managers should do whatever they can to help their project stakeholders use
e-mail, instant messaging, texting, and other tools effectively and not waste time with poor
or unclear communications. Information sent via e-mail, instant messaging, texting, or
a collaborative tool should be appropriate for that medium. If you can communicate the
information better with a phone call or meeting, for example, then do so. If you introduce
a new technique, such as kanban boards, be sure to tailor it to meet your needs. Do not
use new tools because they are the latest fad. Use them because they improve commu-
nications and productivity. Learn how to use important features of your e-mail, texting,
instant messaging, and collaborative software, and make sure that everyone on your team
also learns.
The following guidelines can help you use e-mail as a more effective communication
tool:
Be sure to send e-mail to the right people. Do not automatically "reply to all" on
an e-mail, for example, if it is not necessary.
Use meaningful subject lines in e-mails so readers can quickly see what infor-
mation the message contains. If the entire message can fit in the subject line,
put it there. For example, if a meeting is cancelled, just enter that message
in the subject line. Also, do not continue replying to an e-mail thread when
the subject has changed without changing the subject line. The subject line
should always relate to the latest topic.
Limit the content of the e-mail to one main subject. Send a second or third
e-mail if it relates to a different subject.
The body of the e-mail should be as clear and concise as possible. Use as few
words as possible while maintaining a clear and friendly tone. If three ques-
tions need to be answered, number them as questions 1, 2, and 3 and put
each on a separate line.
Always reread your e-mail before you send it. Also, be sure to check your
spelling using the spell-check function.
Limit the number and size of e-mail attachments. If you can include a link to
an online version of a document instead of attaching a file, do so.
Delete e-mail that you do not need to save or that does not require a re-
sponse. Do not even open e-mail that you know is not important, such as
spam. Use the e-mail blocking feature of the software, if available, to block
unwanted junk mail.
Make sure that your virus protection software is up to date. Never open e-
mail attachments if you do not trust the source.
Respond to e-mail quickly, if possible. It will take you longer to open and read
the e-mail again later. In addition, if you send an e-mail that does not require
a response, make that clear as well.
If you need to keep e-mail, file each message appropriately. Create folders
with meaningful names to file the e-mail messages you want to keep. File
them as soon as possible.
Most people are comfortable with using e-mail, but some may not be familiar with
other technologies. Develop a strategy for getting users up to date, and discuss when it's
best to use other technologies versus e-mail. The following additional guidelines can help
you use other communication tools more effectively:
Collaborative tools continue to advance. Make sure that your team is using a
good tool. Many, like Google Docs and several wikis, are available for free.
Be sure to authorize the right people to share your collaborative documents.
Also ensure that other security is in place. Confidential project documents
should probably not be stored on Google Docs. Use more secure tools when
needed.
Make sure that the right person can authorize changes to shared documents
and that you back up files.
Develop a logical structure for organizing and filing shared documents. Use
good file-naming conventions for folder and document names.
10.6d Using Templates for Project Communications
Many intelligent people have a hard time writing a performance report or preparing a
10-minute technical presentation for a customer review. Some people in these situations
are too embarrassed to ask for help. To make it easier to prepare project communica-
tions, project managers need to provide examples and templates for common project
communications such as project descriptions, project charters, monthly performance
reports, and issue logs. Good documentation from past projects can be an ample source
of examples. Samples and templates of both written and oral reports are particularly
helpful for people who have never had to write project documents or give project presen-
tations. Finding, developing, and sharing relevant templates and sample documents are
important tasks for many project managers. Several examples of project documentation
are provided throughout this text, including a business case, project charter, scope state-
ment, stakeholder analysis, WBS, Gantt chart, and cost estimate. The companion web-
site for this text includes the actual files used to create the templates for these sample
documents. A few of these templates and guidelines for preparing them are provided in
this section.
Figure 10-4 shows a sample template for a brief project description. This form could
be used to show a snapshot of an entire project on one page. For example, top managers
FIGURE 10-4
Start Project
Main Task 1
Project X Description
Scope: Brieýy describe the scope of the project. What business functions are involved,
and what are the main products the project will produce?
Summarize the most critical assumptions for the project.
Assumptions:
Cost: Provide the total estimated cost of the project. If desired, list the total cost
each year.
Schedule: Provide summary information from the project's Gantt chart, as shown.
Focus on summary tasks and milestones.
Deliverable 1
Main Task 2
Deliverable 2
Main Task 3
Deliverable 3
End Project
Task Name
August
Objective: Describe the objective of the project in one or two sentences. Focus on
the business beneåts of doing the project.
September October November December January February March April
6/1
7/26
10/18
12/27
12/27
TABLE 10-3
I.
Accomplishments for January (or appropriate month):
Describe most important accomplishments. Relate them to project's Gantt chart.
Describe other important accomplishments, one bullet for each. If any issues were resolved
from the previous month, list them as accomplishments.
II.
Plans for February (or following month):
Describe most important items to accomplish in the next month. Again, relate them to proj-
ect's Gantt chart.
Describe other important items to accomplish, one bullet for each.
III.
Issues: Briefly list important issues that surfaced or are still important. Managers hate surprises
and want to help the project succeed, so be sure to list issues.
IV.
Project Changes (Dates and Description): List any approved or requested changes to the project.
Include the date of the change and a brief description.
Cengage Learning 2016
might require that all project managers provide a brief project description as part of a
quarterly management review meeting. Peter Gumpert, the program manager in the open-
ing case, might request this type of document from all of his project managers to get an
overall picture of what each project involves. A project description should include the
project objective, scope, assumptions, cost information, and schedule information. This
template suggests including information from the project's Gantt chart to highlight key de-
liverables and other milestones.
Table 10-3 shows a template for a monthly progress report. Sections of the progress
report include accomplishments from the current period, plans for the next period, issues,
and project changes. Recall that progress reports focus on accomplishments during a spe-
cific time period, while status reports focus on where the project stands at a certain point
in time. Because progress and status reports are effective ways to communicate project
information, it is important for project teams to tailor the reports to meet their specific
needs. Some organizations, such as JWD Consulting from Chapter 3, combine both prog-
ress and status information on the same template.
Table 10-4 provides a list of all of the documentation that should be organized and
filed at the end of a major project. From this list, you can see that a large project can gen-
erate a lot of documentation. In fact, some project professionals have observed that docu-
mentation for designing an airplane seems to weigh more than the airplane itself. (Smaller
projects usually generate much less documentation!)
The project manager and project team members should prepare a lessons-learned
report-a reflective statement that documents important information they have learned
from working on the project. The project manager often combines information from
all of the lessons-learned reports into a project summary report. See Chapter 3 for an
example of this type of lessons-learned report. Some items discussed in lessons-learned
reports include reflections on whether project goals were met, whether the project was
successful or not, the causes of variances on the project, the reasoning behind corrective
actions chosen, the use of different project management tools and techniques, and
personal words of wisdom based on team members' experiences. On some projects, all
project members are required to write a brief lessons-learned report; on other projects,
just the team leads or project manager writes the report. These reports provide valuable
reflections by people who know what worked or did not work on the project. Everyone
learns in different ways and has different insights into a project, so it is helpful to have
more than one person provide inputs on the lessons-learned reports. These reports can
be an excellent resource and can help future projects run more smoothly. To reinforce
the benefits of lessons-learned reports, some companies require new project managers to
read past lessons-learned reports and discuss how they will incorporate some of the ideas
into their own projects. It is also important to organize and prepare project archives.
Project archives are a complete set of organized project records that provide an accurate
history of the project. These archives can provide valuable information for future
projects as well.
In the past few years, more and more project teams have started putting all or part
of their project information on project websites, including various templates and lessons-
learned reports. Project websites provide a centralized way of delivering project docu-
ments and other communications. Project teams can develop project websites using wikis,
web authoring tools, or by using free or paid sites available from Google, Basecamp, and
many other companies. The project team should be sure to address important issues in
creating and using a project website, such as security, access, and the type of content that
should be included.
Project teams can use one of the many software products available to assist in proj-
ect communications through the web. These products vary considerably in price and
TABLE 10-4
I.
Project description
II.
Project proposal and backup data (request for proposal, statement of work, proposal
correspondence, and so on)
III.
Original and revised contract information and client acceptance documents
IV.
Original and revised project plans and schedules (WBS, Gantt charts and network diagrams, cost
estimates, communications management plan, etc.)
V.
Design documents
VI.
Final project report
VII.
Deliverables, as appropriate
VIII.
Audit reports
IX.
Lessons-learned reports
X.
Copies of all status reports, meeting minutes, change notices, and other written and electronic
communications
Cengage Learning 2016
functionality, as you learned in Chapter 1. For example, Figure 10-5 shows examples of
using Basecamp on various devices. Many project teams want to access project informa-
tion on mobile devices, so many tools now include this capability.
When the project team develops its project communications management plan,
it should determine what templates to use for key documentation. To make it more
convenient to use templates, the organization should make project templates readily
available online. The project team should also understand what types of documents
are expected by top management and customers for each project. For example,
if a project sponsor or customer wants a one-page monthly progress report for a
specific project, but the project team delivers a 20-page report, there are communica-
tion problems. In addition, if particular customers or top managers want specific items
to be included in all final project reports, they should make sure that the project team
is aware of those expectations and modifies templates for those reports to account for
the requirements.
10.7 USING SOFTWARE TO ASSIST IN PROJECT
COMMUNICATIONS
Many organizations are discovering how valuable project management software can be in
communicating project information across the organization. Project management software
can provide different views of information to help meet various communication needs.
For example, senior managers might only need to see summary screens with colors indi-
cating the overall health of all projects. Middle managers often want to see the status of
milestones for all of the projects in their area. Project team members often need to see all
project documentation. Often, one of the biggest communication problems on projects is
providing the most recent project plans, Gantt charts, specifications, meeting information,
FIGURE 10-5
and change requests to stakeholders in a timely fashion. Most project management soft-
ware allows users to insert hyperlinks to other project-related files. In Project 2013, you
can insert a hyperlink from a task or milestone listed in a Gantt chart to another file that
contains relevant information. For example, there might be a milestone that the project
charter was signed. You can insert a hyperlink from the Gantt chart to the Word file that
contains the project charter. You could also link appropriate tasks or milestones to Excel
files that contain a staffing management plan or cost estimate or to Microsoft PowerPoint
files with important presentations or other information. The Project 2013 file and all as-
sociated hyperlinked files could then be placed on a local area network server or web
server, allowing all project stakeholders easy access to important project information. (See
Appendix A for more information on using Microsoft Project 2013 to assist in project com-
munications management.)
Even though organizations routinely use many types of hardware and software to
enhance communications, they need to take advantage of new technologies and adjust
existing systems to serve the special communications needs of customers and project
teams. In addition to diverse customer and project needs, they have to address the chang-
ing expectations of consumers and the workforce. For example, several television shows
have harnessed communications technology to engage their audiences by letting them
vote online or via cell phone for their favorite singers, e-mail or tweet celebrities, or access
information on their websites or Facebook pages. Many people, especially younger people,
use instant messaging or text messages every day to communicate with friends. Some
business and technical professionals also find instant messaging and text messaging to be
useful tools for quickly communicating with colleagues, customers, suppliers, and others.
Blogs are journals on the web that allow users to write entries, respond to another poster's
comments, create links, upload pictures, and post comments to journal entries. Blogs have
also become popular as a communication technology. If television shows and nontechnical
people can use advanced communications technologies, why can't project stakeholders?
Employers have made changes to meet changing expectations and needs in commu-
nications. On several IT projects, project managers have found that their team members
can be more productive when they are allowed to work from home. Other project manag-
ers have no choice in the matter when some or all of their project team members work
remotely. As you learned in Chapter 9, Project Human Resource Management, studies
show that providing a quiet work environment and a dedicated workspace increases pro-
grammer productivity. Most people who work from home have well-equipped, comfort-
able offices with fewer distractions and more space than corporate offices. Workers also
appreciate the added bonus of avoiding traffic and having more flexible work schedules.
However, it is important to make sure that work is well defined and that communications
are in place to allow remote workers to work effectively.
Several products are available to assist individual consumers and organizations with
communications. Many products were developed or enhanced in recent years to address
the issue of providing fast, convenient, consistent, and up-to-date project information.
Webcasts are now a common tool for presenting video, graphics, sound, voice, and partici-
pant feedback live over the web. Podcasts and YouTube videos have also become popular
tools for providing various types of audio and video information, from exercise instructions
to class lectures. Most working adults and students have cell phones that they use to take
and send pictures or send and receive text messages or e-mail. Many high school or college
students text or tweet their friends to plan social activities or discuss academic topics.
These same technologies can enhance project communications. For even more pow-
erful and integrated communications, enterprise project management software provides
many workgroup functions that allow a team of people at different locations to work to-
gether on projects and share project information. Workgroup functions allow the exchange
of messages through e-mail, an intranet, wireless devices, or the web. For example, you
can use Project 2013 to alert members about new or changed task assignments, and mem-
bers can return status information and notify other workgroup members about changes in
the schedule or other project parameters.
Microsoft Office Enterprise Project Management (EPM) Solution and similar products
also provide the following tools to enhance communications:
Portfolio management: By providing a centralized and consolidated view of
programs and projects, the user can evaluate and prioritize activities across the
organization. This feature makes it possible to maximize productivity, minimize
costs, and keep activities aligned with strategic objectives.
Resource management: Maximizing human resources is often the key to
minimizing project costs. This feature enables the user to maximize re-
source use across the organization to help plan and manage the workforce
effectively.
Project collaboration: Sharing project information is often a haphazard en-
deavor. Project collaboration enables an organization to share knowledge im-
mediately and consistently to improve communications and decision making,
C A S E W R A P - U P
Christine Braun worked closely with Peter Gumpert and his project managers to de-
velop a communications management plan for all of the fiber-optic undersea telecom-
munications projects. Peter was very skilled at running effective meetings, so everyone
focused on meeting specific objectives. Peter emphasized the importance of keeping
himself, the project managers, and other major stakeholders informed about the sta-
tus of all projects. He emphasized that the project managers were in charge of their
projects, and that he did not intend to tell them how to do their jobs. He just wanted
to have accurate and consistent information to help coordinate all of the projects and
make everyone's jobs easier. When some of the project managers balked at the addi-
tional work of providing more project information in different formats, Peter openly dis-
cussed the issues with them in more detail. He then authorized each project manager to
use additional staff to help develop and follow standards for all project communications.
Christine used her strong technical and communications skills to create a website
that included samples of important project documents, presentations, and templates for
other people to download and use on their own projects. After determining the need for
more remote communications and collaboration between projects, Christine and other
staff members researched the latest hardware and software products. Peter authorized
funds for a new project led by Christine to evaluate and then purchase smartphones,
apps, and enterprise project management (EPM) software with wiki capability that could
be accessed via the web. All managers and technical staff, including Peter, received their
own devices, and any project stakeholder could request one and get one-on-one training
for how to use it with the new apps and EPM software.
eliminate redundancies, and take advantage of best practices for project
management.
Communication is among the more important factors for success in project manage-
ment. While technology can aid in the communications process and be the easiest aspect
of the process to address, it is not the most important. Far more important is improving
an organization's ability to communicate. Improving this ability often requires a cultural
change in an organization that takes a lot of time, hard work, and patience. IT personnel,
in particular, often need special coaching to improve their communications skills. The
project manager's chief role in the communications process is that of facilitator. Project
managers must educate all stakeholders-management, team members, and customers-
on the importance of good project communications and ensure that the project has a good
communications management plan.