The Project Management Process Groups
111
3. List what you believe to be the main deliverables for this project.
4. Which deliverables do you think you will help create or review?
Erica collected everyone's inputs. She explained that she would take this information
and work with Jessie to develop the first draft of the scope statement that she would
e-mail to everyone by the end of the week. She also suggested that they all meet again in
one week to develop the scope statement further and to start creating the WBS for the
project.
Erica and Jessie reviewed all the information and created the first draft of the scope
statement. At their next team meeting, they discussed the scope statement and got a good
start on the WBS. Table 3-9 shows a portion of the scope statement that Erica created
after a few more e-mails and another team meeting. Note that the scope statement lists
the product characteristics and requirements, summarizes the deliverables, and describes
project success criteria in detail.
Project Title: Project Management Intranet Site Project
Date: May 18
Prepared by: Erica Bell, Project Manager, erica_bell@jwdconsulting.com
Project Summary and Justification: Joe Fleming, CEO of JWD Consulting, requested
this project to assist the company in meeting its strategic goals. The new intranet site
will increase visibility of the company's expertise to current and potential clients. It will
also help reduce internal costs and improve profitability by providing standard tools,
techniques, templates, and project management knowledge to all internal consultants.
The budget for the project is $140,000. An additional $40,000 per year will be required
for operational expenses after the project is completed. Estimated benefits are
$200,000 each year. It is important to focus on the system paying for itself within one
year of its completion.
Product Characteristics and Requirements:
1. Templates and tools: The intranet site will allow authorized users to download
files they can use to create project management documents and to help them use
project management tools. These files will be in Microsoft Word, Excel, Access,
Project, or in HTML or PDF format, as appropriate.
2. User submissions: Users will be encouraged to e-mail files with sample templates
and tools to the Webmaster. The Webmaster will forward the files to the
appropriate person for review and then post the files to the intranet site, if desired.
3. Articles: Articles posted on the intranet site will have appropriate copyright
permission. The preferred format for articles will be PDF. The project manager may
approve other formats.
4. Requests for articles: The intranet site will include a section for users to ask
someone from the Project Management Office (PMO) at JWD Consulting to
research appropriate articles for them. The PMO manager must first approve the
request and negotiate payments, if appropriate.
TABLE 3-9 Scope statement draft
(continued)
Chapter 3
112
5. Links: All links to external sites will be tested on a weekly basis. Broken links will
be fixed or removed within five working days of discovery.
6. The Ask the Expert feature must be user-friendly and capable of soliciting
questions and immediately acknowledging that the question has been received in
the proper format. The feature must also be capable of forwarding the question to
the appropriate expert (as maintained in the system's expert database) and capable
of providing the status of questions that are answered. The system must also allow
for payment for advice, if appropriate.
7. Security: The intranet site must provide several levels of security. All internal
employees will have access to the entire intranet site when they enter their
security information to access the main, corporate intranet. Part of the intranet
will be available to the public from the corporate website. Other portions of the
intranet will be available to current clients based on verification with the current
client database. Other portions of the intranet will be available after negotiating a
fee or entering a fixed payment using pre-authorized payment methods.
8. Search feature: The intranet site must include a search feature for users to search
by topic and key words.
9. The intranet site must be accessible using a company-approved Internet browser.
Users must have appropriate application software to open several of the templates
and tools.
10. The intranet site must be available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, with one
hour per week for system maintenance and other periodic maintenance, as
appropriate.
Summary of Project Deliverables
Project management-related deliverables: Business case, project charter, team
charter, scope statement, WBS, schedule, cost baseline, progress reports, final project
presentation, final project report, lessons-learned report, and any other documents
required to manage the project.
Product-related deliverables:
1. Survey: Survey current consultants and clients to help determine desired content
and features for the intranet site.
2. Files for templates: The intranet site will include templates for at least
20 documents when the system is first implemented, and it will have the
capacity to store up to 100 documents. The project team will decide on the initial
20 templates based on survey results.
3. Examples of completed templates: The intranet site will include examples of
projects that have used the templates available on the site. For example, if there is
a template for a business case, there will also be an example of a real business case
that uses the template.
TABLE 3-9 Scope statement draft (continued)
(continued)
The Project Management Process Groups
113
4. Instructions for using project management tools: The intranet site will include
information on how to use several project management tools, including the
following as a minimum: work breakdown structures, Gantt charts, network
diagrams, cost estimates, and earned value management. Where appropriate,
sample files will be provided in the application software appropriate for the
tool. For example, Microsoft Project files will be available to show sample work
breakdown structures, Gantt charts, network diagrams, cost estimates, and
applications of earned value management. Excel files will be available for sample
cost estimates and earned value management charts.
5. Example applications of tools: The intranet site will include examples of real
projects that have applied the tools listed in number 4.
6. Articles: The intranet site will include at least 10 useful articles about relevant
topics in project management. The intranet site will have the capacity to store at
least 1,000 articles in PDF format with an average length of 10 pages each.
7. Links: The intranet site will include links with brief descriptions for at least 20
useful sites. The links will be categorized into meaningful groups.
8. Expert database: In order to deliver an Ask the Expert feature, the system must
include and access a database of approved experts and their contact information.
Users will be able to search for experts by predefined topics.
9. User Requests feature: The intranet site will include an application to solicit and
process requests from users.
10. Intranet site design: An initial design of the new intranet site will include a site
map, suggested formats, and appropriate graphics. The final design will incorporate
comments from users on the initial design.
11. Intranet site content: The intranet site will include content for the templates and
tools sections, articles section, article retrieval section, links section, Ask the
Expert section, User Requests feature, security, and payment features.
12. Test plan: The test plan will document how the intranet site will be tested, who will
do the testing, and how bugs will be reported.
13. Promotion: A plan for promoting the intranet site internally and externally will
describe various approaches for soliciting inputs during design. The promotion
plan will also announce the availability of the new intranet site.
14. Project benefit measurement plan: A project benefit plan will measure the financial
value of the intranet site.
Project Success Criteria: Our goal is to complete this project within six months for no
more than $140,000. The project sponsor, Joe Fleming, has emphasized the importance
of the project paying for itself within one year after the site is complete. To meet this
financial goal, the intranet site must have strong user inputs. We must also develop a
method for capturing the benefits while the intranet site is being developed and tested,
and after it is rolled out. If the project takes a little longer to complete or costs a little
more than planned, the firm will still view it as a success if it has a good payback and
helps promote the firm's image as an excellent consulting organization.
TABLE 3-9 Scope statement draft (continued)